headline: We should never 'move on' from the evil, pain, loss, lessons of September 11
byline: By T. J. McCormack


I was living in Los Angeleson September 11, 2001. I remember my first visit back home to New York for Thanksgiving that year. My wife and I made the pilgrimage to pay our respects at Ground Zero -- at that point still very much the pile of rubble with the iconic twisted facade still jutting out.

Posters of the missing were still all around -- the collages of faces of the dead. Even this seemed to be like something out of a movie, much like the falling towers and dust clouds which engulfed lower Manhattan looked like so many special effects.

I remember not wanting to look at any of it.Notwanting to see the faces on the poster board, or look at the dust knowing that indeed there was a certain variety of ash in that dirt on the shoe or store window.

We must look at the faces and read the names of the dead. 

We must hear "let's roll" and get goosebumps, we must think of the parentless children and ache.

But I did look at all of it.

I looked closely.

I took it all in, and I was hurting.

I was crying. Whimpering right there on Wall Street.

I was nauseous.

I felt it was the very least I could do, for while I personally knew one person who died that day, and grew up with the widow of a fallen FDNY hero, I lost no relatives. No loved ones.

Still, I felt it incumbent upon me, as an American, as a New Yorker, as a fellow child of God to feel some pain, to be at least somewhat uncomfortable. Again, the very least I could do.

Nowadays aroundthe 11th of Septemberyou hear a growing chorus of "I can't watch that anymore" or "They're showing the buildings again? Do they have to?"

There are people who want to forget it and move on. I'd like to say I respect that, but I don't. Not one bit.

We're not allowed to move on. With the exception of the families of the victims -- I shall NEVER sit in judgement of them -- we are not allowed to get past9-11-01.

Every network should follow the lead of Fox News Channel and replay footage of that day. Schoolchildren from the sixth grade on should see appropriate video of 9/11 with high schoolers seeing everything including The Jumpers. Especially, The Jumpers. For many, the most jarring of the images that day.

Students must learn about, and we must all remember and meditate upon the evil, the pain, the loss.

We must honor the bravery, the selflessness and the calm.

We must watch the video, we must listen to the 9/11 calls.

We must remember the attack was carried out by evil Islamic extremist terrorists. Sorry, but that's a fact.

We must look at the faces and read the names of the dead.

We must hear "let's roll" and get goosebumps, we must think of the parentless children and ache.

We must watch The Jumpers and try in vain to imagine that final decision.

Think about The Jumpers.

It is the very least we can do.

RIP Joe Riverso #70. RIP Joe Spor FDNY Rescue 3.





headline: Miley Cyrus is young America
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Miley Cyrus shocked America with her recent, very sexual performance on MTV’s VMA awards show. Among other things, she simulated sex and used a large foam finger to touch herself.

Now, she is appearing completely naked riding a wrecking ball and sensually licking a sledge hammer in her newest music video.

Well, don’t be shocked.

Cyrus isn’t crazy, and she isn’t stupid. And she is certainly not talentless.

She knows or is responding to something that I have been writing about for years now: As technology sterilizes the range of human experience and drains our autonomy into the Web, leaving us spiritually empty, human beings will seek to remind themselves they are alive in very raw ways.

Miley Cyrus is the Mixed Martial Artist of pop. But she isn’t just gloves-off, she’s topless and bottomless.

They will do this by having more sex, buying more sexually explicit material, watching and participating in extreme, dangerous sports, piercing themselves, tattooing themselves, drugging themselves to feel less spiritually dead and eating themselves into obesity.

Sex, drugs, violence and food are our unfortunate dams against the rising tide of complete depersonalization that we now face.

Miley Cyrus is just the leading edge of young people desperately searching for icons to keep them from drowning in the fakery of Facebook and iPhones and Twitter and addiction to plastic surgery and the overuse of Prozac and the scientifically unsettled, psychologically unsettling implications of “gender reassignment.”

With little to believe in (certainly not their individual initiative or dreams, given what I call the “dependency drug” being sold from D.C.), they know they can at least believe in a flat abdomen, in their ability to attract the opposite sex, in their ability to bring sexual partners to climax and in their own ability to climax.

When we have a camera-ready president all too ready to go on late night TV talk shows again and again and chat glibly about world events, who is also willing to model on the cover of GQ magazine, and U.S. senators willing to appear in movies playing themselves, a first lady who is willing to appear in a hip-hop video and Senator John McCain tweeting his opposition to Secretary of State John Kerry’s comments about Syria, we have lost our way so completely, have gotten so utterly sucked into the Web of technology, we are so far on the road toward disempowering ourselves by essentially “playing” ourselves in mini-reality TV versions of what could have been our real lives, that Miley Cyrus looks to young people like a road back to reality.

Did Senator McCain’s staff even consider that it might be better for a patriot, decorated war hero and supreme public servant to not “Tweet?”

Maybe next stop is "Dancing with the Stars"?

Miley Cyrus is the Mixed Martial Artist of pop. But she isn’t just gloves-off, she’s topless and bottomless. And so what if she supposedly lost the cover of Vogue because of her antics. Fashion magazines are now officially a joke compared to the reach of the Internet.

After all, as an entertainer and icon she has to stay several steps ahead of mainstream America, which is flocking to styles like the “crop top” just heralded by Fashion Week in New York—a top for women this spring that bares the skin under their breasts, all the way down past their belly buttons.

With otherwise serious people going around half-naked to attract the opposite sex, what is a diva to do?





headline: Syria strike's dangerous calculus = Assad loses and Al Qaeda wins
byline: By Jay Sekulow


American credibility is at stake in Syria, but not necessarily in the way that President Obama thinks.

By now, we’ve all heard the arguments for intervention:

Moreover, the president himself declared in 2012 that the use of chemical weapons was a “red line” – even though he recently tried to re-write history by claiming the “red line” was drawn by the world community, not him.

The president has said that if we don’t act, our enemies will think America is weak.

But that’s only half the story.

When considering whether America should “degrade” the Assad regime, it’s worth considering who benefits. It’s increasingly clear that if Assad loses, Al Qaeda wins.

The Syrian crisis represents the utter demise of the Obama Middle East policy – a foreign policy that is not in the best interest of America. 

Here’s how the New York Times described the Syrian opposition, in April:

Across Syria, rebel-held areas are dotted with Islamic courts staffed by lawyers and clerics, and by fighting brigades led by extremists. Even the Supreme Military Council, the umbrella rebel organization whose formation the West had hoped would sideline radical groups, is stocked with commanders who want to infuse Islamic law into a future Syrian government.

Nowhere in rebel-controlled Syria is there a secular fighting force to speak of.

Since April, the situation has only grown worse. Reports have surfaced of unspeakable rebel atrocities, including murdering a Catholic priest, attacking Christian villages, and literally eating the hearts of enemies (and brazenly recording the act for the Internet). And now we learn that Al Qaeda is behind these horrific attacks against Christians in Syria.

In fact, even as the U.N. investigates Assad regime atrocities, it’s also investigating the rebels.

Even as Secretary of State John Kerry claimed that moderate forces were gaining strength in the rebel army, independent experts disagreed:

Secretary of State John Kerry's public assertions that moderate Syrian opposition groups are growing in influence appear to be at odds with estimates by U.S. and European intelligence sources and nongovernmental experts, who say Islamic extremists remain by far the fiercest and best-organized rebel elements.

With “no secular fighting force to speak of,” and with extremists the “by far the fiercest and best-organized rebel elements,” any American effort to “degrade” Assad runs the risk of empowering Al Qaeda.

From both a legal and strategic point of view, this is intolerable. As a matter of domestic and international law, the United States is in a state of armed conflict with Al Qaeda.

On the other hand, while we have ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention, which bans the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons, Syria has not.

We are under no international legal obligation to commence military hostilities against Syria.

Strategically, the only thing that could impair American credibility more than an empty threat is taking action that actually benefits our declared enemy: Al Qaeda.

While the Assad regime has had chemical weapons for many years, it has never used those weapons against Israel, the United States, or any of our other allies.

But if a weakened Assad regime is overrun by the “fiercest and best-organized rebel elements” does anyone doubt that Al Qaeda would use chemical weapons against us at its first opportunity?

The Syrian crisis represents the utter demise of the Obama Middle East policy – a foreign policy that is not in the best interest of America.

In thinking that he could engage our enemies, the president only empowered them.

As he dithered on helping our few allies in Syria, Al Qaeda rushed in to fill the vacuum.

And now we face the terrifying possibility that American action could – unintentionally, to be sure – end up helping jihadists seize control not just of a strategically vital nation but also its deadly stockpiles of WMDs.

As Congress debates action in Syria, it must not authorize any action that would enhance Al Qaeda’s strategic position in the Middle East.

Supporters of military action must be able to articulate precisely how “degrading” Assad does not end up enabling the most vicious rebels. And that is something President Obama must address when he takes his case before the American people on Tuesday night.

After all, as intolerable as the Assad regime is, Al Qaeda is worse – and Al Qaeda has attacked the United States. The Assad regime has not.

There’s an old saying, “the enemy of my enemy is my friend,” and there’s no doubt Assad is an enemy of the U.S. and Israel. Yet when it comes to Al Qaeda, the enemy of our enemy is still our enemy, an even greater enemy than Assad.





headline: America, we must stop ObamaCare before it becomes hazardous to our health
byline: By Jim DeMint


New York’s famous 42nd Street will offer natives and visitors a new sight later this week: a mammoth, six-story billboard with a striking message: “Warning—Obamacare may be hazardous to your health.”

It’s part of The Heritage Foundation’s continuing public education campaign to inform the American people about the dangerous side-effects of this unfair, unaffordable and unworkable law, and how it can be stopped.

How will ObamaCare—a 2,700-page law passed by a single vote over bipartisan opposition— harm Americans’ health?

Well, here are five of its worst side effects.

First, many Americans will lose their current health coverage. That’s what’s happening to Rod Coons and Florence Peace, a married couple in Indianapolis. Rod and Florence like their current plan.

ObamaCare is not just bad for Americans’ physical health—it’s bad for America’s fiscal health as well.

“I’d prefer to stay with our current plan because it meets our needs,” Rod says. 

Unfortunately, their current coverage fails to meet new requirements imposed under ObamaCare by federal bureaucrats. At the end of this year, that plan will no longer be available to Rod and Florence. They’ll have to find another, ObamaCare-sanctioned plan that may restrict their access to certain treatments or force them to buy coverages they neither want nor need.

Second, many Americans will lose access to physicians they trust. The Wall Street Journal recently highlighted the case of John Nowak, who faces a dilemma when he chooses an insurance plan on ObamaCare’s Exchanges this fall. He “will be able to pick a [revised, ObamaCare-compliant] plan from his current insurer—or go for one that includes his primary-care doctor.”

To save costs, many plans on ObamaCare’s Exchanges are limiting physician networks. So if John chooses to keep his current insurance carrier, he may not be able to keep his current doctor. At minimum, he will pay a lot more to see that physician out-of-network.

Third, ObamaCare places bureaucrats between doctors and patients. The law imposes new penalties on doctors who do “not satisfactorily submit data” that meet Washington bureaucrats’ standards.

It also creates a panel of unelected, unaccountable bureaucrats empowered to make rulings that reduce Medicare spending.

Little wonder that nearly three in five physicians responding to a recent Deloitte survey think the practice of medicine is in jeopardy.

Fourth, ObamaCare dumps millions of patients onto Medicaid—a health program so bad that not even Medicaid patients call it “real insurance.” An analyst for the liberal Consumers Union once admitted that a Medicaid card is but a “hunting license”—“a chance to go try and find a doctor” that actually accepts Medicaid patients.

Moreover, several studies have shown that people enrolled in Medicaid often have worse medical outcomes than those with no health insurance at all.

Expanding a broken Medicaid program is just giving millions of Americans a cruel and empty promise—an insurance card with limited access to real health care.

Fifth, ObamaCare’s reductions in Medicare spending could undermine the health system for millions of seniors.

According to the non-partisan Medicare actuary, the law’s arbitrary spending reductions could cause 15% of hospitals to become unprofitable by 2019, and as many as 40% of hospitals to become unprofitable in the long term. These hospitals could face the choice between shutting out seniors or shutting their doors for good.

Either outcome is unacceptable.

ObamaCare is not just bad for Americans’ physical health—it’s bad for America’s fiscal health as well. If Congress does not act, on January 1, 2014, Washington will tap a gusher of new federal spending on ObamaCare.

Over the next decade, the cost of the law’s new entitlements will soar more than fivefold, from $48 billion in 2014 to $250 billion in 2023.

That will create a lot of pain in taxpayers’ wallets.

For all these reasons and more, Congress must act, and act now, to stop ObamaCare before it takes root.

This fall, Congress will have an opportunity to use its “power of the purse” to block ObamaCare from going forward.

I recently traveled across the country on a town hall tour sponsored by our sister organization, Heritage Action for America.

I met many Americans concerned about the impact of ObamaCare on their health care, who want the law stopped immediately.

There are things we can and should do to improve America’s health care system and reduce costs, but first we must stop ObamaCare before it starts.

The law is a dangerous prescription for America, and its side effects will damage our collective health.





headline: America's leadership vacuum makes 9/11 anniversary even harder
byline: By Anne Bayefsky


Born and bred in Canada, I settled in New York City on September 9, 2001. I came via Durban, South Africa, after enduring the U.N.’s virulently racist “anti-racism” world conference.

On September 11, watching the smoke rise from a hundred blocks away and enveloped by the grieving everywhere, I was struck by the unmistakable connection between U.N.-promoted hate and the terror it emboldens.

Who could imagine that a mere twelve years later, in an effort to save his plummeting credibility, the president of the United States would grasp a U.N. straw as a means to realize the very peace and security the organization so notoriously undermines?

Every anniversary of 9/11 we are reminded that the hole in our hearts is still there.This year, the leadership vacuum in this great country is making the emptiness harder to bear.

The trust deficit between America and its president is now profound.

President Obama’s foreign policy of engagement lies in tatters. Isolated as never before, his major address on Tuesday night was hopelessly incoherent.

He told us that the touchstone for America’s national security interest in Syria was 1,400 people who perished from chemical weapons, not 100,000 Syrians who have died from cruelty of all kinds.

Chemical weapons are different, says the president, “because they kill with no distinction between soldier and infant.” But how is that worse than mass torture, beheading, executions and sexual violence that deliberately target civilians, young and old?

The purpose of this strike, he said, was to prove that the world will not tolerate the use of chemical weapons. But we will tolerate the day-in-and-day-out butchery of thousands of other Syrians, or those elsewhere around the globe?

And then there was the specter of the real evil – the president stressing that not acting will “embolden Iran.” Such a concern is a justification for targeting Iran, not Syria. But to paraphrase John Kerry, the president’s ‘unbelievably small’ backbone won’t carry that weight.

On the contrary, the president astonishingly added that Iran “must decide whether to ignore international law by building a nuclear weapon or to take a more peaceful path.” But Iran is violating international law, is building a nuclear weapon, is training and financing Assad’s killers, is the leading state sponsor of terrorism, and has no intention of pursuing a more peaceful path.

In short, the trust deficit between America and its president is now profound. There were falsehoods about red lines that the president did not set, when he did.

Loose talk about “norms,” because hard laws don’t apply.

Clamors about the necessity for urgent action, followed by presidential golf games and overseas trips.Claims about coalitions that never materialized.

Tuesday’s U.N. yarn was spun from the same cloth.Just this past Friday the president called proffering more resolutions on Syria at the U.N. “the usual hocus pocus.”

The same day U.N. Ambassador Samantha Power declared: “The international system that was founded in 1945…has not lived up to its promise or its responsibilities…[T]he Security Council the world needs to deal with this urgent crisis is not the Security Council we have.”

With Congressional failure to authorize the use of force around the corner, however, the president said more U.N. hocus pocus is exactly what we need.

He even promised to “give U.N. inspectors the opportunity to report their findings about what happened” – despite the fact that press secretary Jay Carney insisted on August 26: “we do not have confidence that the U.N. can conduct a credible inquiry into what happened.”

The French apparently also believe in magic.They have already proposed a draft resolution finding that the Syrian government used chemical weapons, referring the Syrian case to the International Criminal Court for prosecution, demanding “an exhaustive, complete and definitive declaration of the locations, amount and types of all items related to its chemical warfare program” within 15 days, requiring immediate on-site inspections anywhere U.N. inspectors want to go, and imposing sanctions against any Syrian that disobeys.

Not surprisingly, the Russians cancelled a Council session they had originally called for Tuesday afternoon. And President Putin has started his own list of demands, including an unattainable American guarantee not to use force against Syria.

So while Obama’s snake oil salesmen try selling the U.N. as his latest antidote, here’s where we really stand at the U.N. on the twelfth anniversary of 9/11:

- The United Nations still has no internationally-agreed definition of terrorism.

- The lead counter-terrorism committee, created in the wake of 9/11, has never named a single terrorist, terrorist organization or state sponsor of terrorism.

- A comprehensive convention on international terrorism still has not been adopted.

- 9/11 conspiracy theorist and Boston-terror apologist Richard Falk is still an official U.N. expert. And the U.N.’s human rights and counter-terrorism authority recently declared that “an end to the military conflict with Al Qaeda and its associates [and] the closure of Guantanamo” are “essential for international peace and security."

A far cry, Mr. President, from those “ideals and principles” which were our lifeline twelve years ago.





headline: President Obama and the power of an Oval Office address
byline: By Jane Hampton Cook


Editor's note: The White House initially announced that President Obama would speak from the Oval Office in an address to the nation on the Syria crisis on September 10. On Tuesday evening, the address was delivered instead from the East Room of the White House.

When President Obama addresses the nation Tuesday night, he will do so from the Oval Office, the most symbolic room in the White House.

By speaking from the Oval, he will signal the American people that “this is my most important message for America right now. This message is for you.”

Over the years many presidents have tapped the emblematic power of the oval when they have something supremely important to convey. Why does the Oval Office carry such significance? It starts with the shape. Ovals suggest equality and representation.

When presidents choose the Oval as their backdrop, they send a symbolic message that says: “this talk is for you.”

Take George Washington. When he served as our first president, he lived in a house in Philadelphia.

He ordered the construction of bow-shaped ends to the room where he received guests. He stood in the middle and his guests surrounded him. By encircling him, no one person was closer to the president than anyone else.

This was a contrast to a monarchy.

Unlike a rectangle-shaped room, the oval shape created an equal playing field, a very republican—and democratic—idea. Oval-shaped tables in business settings carry the same symbolism.

In the 1790s Washington envisioned plans for the soon-to-be built President’s House to include an oval-shaped room.

Today that house is called the White House and that room is called the Blue Room, which is in the center of the state or main floor.

In 1909 President William Howard Taft tapped the power of the oval once again. He ordered the construction of a new office, the Oval Office, in the newly built West Wing adjacent to the White House.

In this way he showed that he was the center of the Executive Branch of government. He did this literally, too, by asking that all executive agencies send their budgets to him first before giving them to Congress.

Fast forward to the television era. For the first time Americans could see their president in the Oval Office.

They could see the logic behind President Kennedy’s call for tax reductions through the charts he had erected in the Oval Office for his speech.

They could see the tension in Jimmy Carter’s body language as he pounded the Oval Office desk more than thirty times to show his angst over the country’s decline during his “malaise” or Crisis of Confidence speech.

They could hear the tenderness in Ronald Reagan’s voice as he spoke about the tragedy of the space shuttle Challenger’s explosion.

They could detect the sadness in George W. Bush’s eyes when he spoke from the Oval Office the night of the terrorists attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

As symbolic as it is, the Oval has one draw back. Because presidents do not have a live audience with them when they speak from the Oval Office, they don’t enjoy the same energetic feedback that they receive from a large crowd at a campaign rally.

They can’t see the response on people’s faces or get revved up from boisterous applause. They are literally talking into a silent camera. As a result, sometimes they come across stiff in an Oval Office address.

Reagan, a former professional actor, was the best at overcoming this challenge. That’s one reason he chose to speak from the Oval Office more than two dozen times, the most of any modern president.

Regardless, the power of the Oval can overcome the stiffness of a monologue. When presidents choose the Oval as their backdrop, they send a symbolic message that says: “this talk is for you.” It’s as if they’ve invited each American to stand in a circle around them and listen to the most important thing they have to say about the greatest issue facing the nation at the time.

In this century, the president saturates the lives of Americans 24/7 through social media and a never-ending news cycle. President Obama has only spoken two previous times from the Oval Office. By rarely using it as a setting, he heightens the importance of his message when he does use it.

Only time will tell if Obama’s speech Tuesday night about attacking Syria is successful. A recent Gallup poll shows that only 36% of Americans support U.S. intervention in Syria.

He needs enough people to surround him in support for his plan for the crisis in Syria.

He needs the power of the people to pressure Congress to support his plan.

He needs the power of the Oval.

Only time will tell if he is successful.





headline: Florida official tells Christian charity to choose between Jesus and cheese
byline: By Todd Starnes


A Florida ministry that feeds the poor said a state agriculture department official told them they would not be allowed to receive USDA food unless they removed portraits of Christ, the Ten Commandments, a banner that read “Jesus is Lord” and stopping giving Bibles to the needy.
“They told us they could no longer allow us to have any religious information where the USDA food is going to be,” said Kay Daly, executive director of the Christian Service Center.

So why did the government have an issue with the religious group’s religious decorations?
A spokesperson for the Florida Department of Agriculture told me they were following the guidelines written by the USDA.

“This program is a USDA-funded program and the requirements were outlined by the USDA,” spokesperson Amanda Bevis said. “This agency administers the program on the state level. Our staff did provide a briefing to CSC following turnover in leadership at CSC and did review the USDA requirements.”

Daly said they were told it was a matter of separation of church and state.
A USDA spokesperson told me that “under current law, organizations that receive USDA nutrition assistance can still engage in religious activities so long as the activity is not used to create a barrier to eligible individuals receiving food.”

The USDA referred to an Executive Order providing equal protection for faith-based organizations. That order guarantees those groups the right to provide assistance without “removing or altering religious art, icons, scriptures or other symbols from these facilities.”

For the past 31 years, the Christian ministry has been providing food to the hungry in Lake City, Fla. without any problems. But all that changed when they said a state government worker showed up to negotiate a new contract.

“The (person) told us there was a slight change in the contract,” Daly told me. “They said we could no longer have religious information where the USDA food is being distributed. They told us we had to take that stuff down.”

Daly said it’s no secret that the Christian Service Center is a Christian ministry.

“We’ve got pictures of Christ on more than one wall,” she said. “It’s very clear we are not social services. We are a Christian ministry.”

Daly and her staff sat in stunned disbelief as the government agents also informed them that the Christian Service Center could no longer pray or provide Bibles to those in need. The government contract also forbade any references to the ministry’s chapel.

“We asked if we had to change the name of the organization but that said we could leave that,” Daly said. “But we had to take our religious stuff down.”

Daly said they were told they could continue distributing USDA food so long as it was somewhere else on the property – away from anything that could be considered religious.

In other words – the Christian Service Center had a choice: choose God or the government cheese.

So in a spirit of Christian love and fellowship, Daly politely told the government what they could do with their cheese.

“We decided to eliminate the USDA food and we’re going to trust God to provide,” she told me. “If God can multiply fish and loaves for 10,000 people, he can certainly bring in food for our food pantry so we can continue to feed the hungry.”

In a nutshell, Daly said the Christian Service Center would not be compromising.

“We are a Christian ministry,” she said. “Our purpose is to help people in need and to share the gospel of Jesus Christ. We are going to pray with them. We are going to offer them a Bible. We are going to counsel them in Christian help. We are going to use our chapel.”

Churches across Lake City have stepped up to the challenge – filling the void left when the government took away their cheese.

“I’m called to do what the Lord tells me to do,” Daly said. “I’m not called to worry about it. I pray about it. The Lord answers our prayers and we move forward one day at a time, one person at a time.”





headline: No minds changed by Syria speech but Obama's message is loud and clear
byline: By Douglas E. Schoen


Bottom line: I don’t think the president changed any minds Tuesday night. And I don’t think he intended to.

President Obama didn’t make the case Tuesday night that a military strike would have any consequential impact on degrading the chemical weapons the Syrians have now acknowledged exist.

And he didn’t make a specific case about what a military strike would achieve beyond speaking in generalities about the arguably serious need to retaliate in kind for the chemical attack that occurred on August 21st.

But I don’t think that either of those points were ultimately the main message of the speech.

The main message was for President Obama to make clear that he does not want to bomb Syria if he can avoid it. And he is hoping that his own efforts, and those of Secretary of State John Kerry in Moscow on Thursday, will delay, diffuse, and otherwise remove the threat of chemical weapons in Syria.

The main message President Obama wanted to deliver to the nation Tuesday night was to make clear that he does not want to bomb Syria if he can avoid it.

In his speech Tuesday night, Obama avoided discussing the practical issues involved in finding the chemical weapons, even if there are international inspectors involved. Or, more to the point, how they will get to those sites given that there is a civil war going on.

Put another way, I don’t believe the president changed any minds or moved any Americans Tuesday night.

But I do believe that he did something which, for him, is arguably as important. The president was able to fundamentally change the dialogue from one that was threatening his presidency.

The process of going to Congress with his resolution, which was most certainly going to be defeated, having it defeated and then having to make the unpalatable decision of either standing down because of congressional opposition or going forward on his own surely does not represent a option the president would want to take.

It follows that the president knew his political position was untenable. And the offer that has now come from the Syrians and the Russians in response to John Kerry’s off-the-cuff comment in London, and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s public encouragement of that option Monday, is such that the president is hoping against hope that he can trust a Russian government and a Syrian government who have shown to be untrustworthy at best and murderous at worst.





headline: Many questions, scant justice from Obama White House one year after Benghazi attacks
byline: By Sen. Marco Rubio


One year ago today, on September 11, 2012, we were reminded that despite our successes in the war on terror, Al Qaeda and its affiliates continue to threaten the United States and our personnel and facilities around the world. 

We remember the lives and service of the four Americans, including Ambassador Chris Stevens, who were slain in Benghazi, Libya while trying to help bring peace and stability to a country going through a difficult transition. 

We pray for their families who still mourn the loss of their loved ones.

Unfortunately, a year later many questions remain about this tragedy. 

Just last month, Secretary of State John Kerry absolved the four State Department employees, who had previously been removed from their jobs, of any responsibility for the security failures that put Ambassador Stevens and his colleagues at risk. 

Despite  President Obama’s pledge to bring the perpetrators to justice, none of the terrorists who murdered four Americans have been killed or captured.

This raises questions about the work of the Accountability Review Board and also means that no one at the State Department has been held accountable. 

Astonishingly, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee has yet to schedule hearings with the survivors of the attack, or State Department employees directly involved in overseeing the security of the diplomatic facility in Benghazi or the administration’s response that night. 

It’s also unacceptable that despite President Obama’s pledge last year that his “biggest priority” was to bring the perpetrators to justice, none of the terrorists who attacked the compound in Benghazi and who murdered four Americans have been killed or captured. 

Those who would threaten Americans and our interests are watching this failure to respond to the first murder of an American ambassador in the line of duty in decades closely. 

We need to make sure that our men and women who serve overseas are adequately protected. 

The Obama administration continues to show no interest in learning from the mistakes that led to this tragic event. The administration’s unwillingness to take this attack seriously will have implications for our national security for years to come.





headline: Twelve years ago, on 9/11, terrorists aimed to destroy us but our faith made us stronger
byline: By Kelly Wright


On September 11, 2013, we remember the day the towers fell, and the Pentagon burned, and a scorched earth in Shanksville, Pennsylvania.

I remember the tears streaming down our faces as we continued to watch the horrific events of that tragic day unfold.

We were on our jobs, or we were at home getting ready for the day.

Whatever we were doing, when all of us heard or saw the news about the attacks on 9/11, we were stunned, sadden and cried out in grief and anguish.

Let us remember that we are still one nation under God with liberty and justice for all.

In a state of bewilderment, some of us kept hoping against hope that we were just going through some bad nightmare, hoping it would end soon and everything would be okay. But reality punched us in our gut and our souls cried out; why would someone do this?

How can people be so cruel to unleash this kind of attack on innocent people?

We remember the cowardly acts of despicable terror inflicting pain and casualties, filling our hearts with pain and misery.

We remember in the days following the attack how loved ones posted the pictures of their relatives, wives, husbands, fathers, mothers and dear friends.

We remember how they asked if you’ve seen this person please contact us. 

We remember how heroic victims in the towers managed to call their loved ones and tell them how much they loved them.

We remember how heroes on the flight that crashed in Shanksville, Pennsylvania bravely fought against those enemies who had taken over their plane.

We remember them saying; “Let’s Roll!”

We remember how we came together as a nation united in our resolve to comfort each other and console those who lost their loved ones on 9/11.

We remember how members of Congress stood on the steps of the U.S. Capitol, democrats, republicans and independents singing, “God Bless America. Land that I love, stand beside her and guide her through the night with a light from above.”

On this day of reflection of the September 11th terror attacks, let us remember that we are still one nation under God with liberty and justice for all.

Terrorists aimed to destroy us but our faith makes us stronger. 
Terrorists struck at the heart of our financial strength and military prowess but they could not destroy the heart of our faith.

We must remember that God crowned our good with brotherhood from sea to shining sea. 

We remember!





headline: Voting for 'victims'
byline: By Phyllis Chesler


I once married a Muslim "man of color" and assumed, unthinkingly that, as an outsider himself, he might somehow identify with and make common cause with women.

I found that this misguided assumption was untrue and, in my new book, "An American Bride in Kabul," I write about my unsentimental education in such matters, an education which took place both in America and in Afghanistan long ago.

I had also once assumed that all formerly colonized peoples and Third World impoverished countries were filled with naturally noble inhabitants who were instinctively spiritual and kind to each other.

I quickly discovered that barbarism is indigenous to such regions, and that tribal and religious wars, the most profound misogyny, cruelty, and corruption were accepted asnormal." It was only a crime to criticize such practices.

I learned long ago that belonging to a particular gender, race, class, religion, or sexual preference tells us nothing about how a particular person might think or behave.

Nevertheless, I became a proud member of the 1960s non-violent Civil Rights movement.

Thus, as an ardent anti-racist, I must deplore the racialization/Balkanization of identity and the valorization of victim status that has come to characterize the contemporary American academy and electoral politics.

Not every victim transcends their ordeal. Many inflict upon others (or upon themselves) precisely what was done to them and they do so over and over again. Not all victims are heroes; some are.

I learned long ago that belonging to a particular gender, race, class, religion, or sexual preference tells us nothing about how a particular person might think or behave.

Women can be cruel, men can be compassionate (and vice versa of course); people of color, those who share the same religion, and gay people, routinely exploit, scapegoat, and are prejudiced towards others like themselves. They have internalized the same sexist, xenophobic, and racist beliefs as everyone else.

At first, I did not believe this was possible but it has become very clear that like some heterosexual men, lesbians sometimes batter their partners. Lesbian custody battles are sometimes very bitter. Imagine two women fighting over who will remain their child's mother. Even Solomon would not be able to solve this.

In terms of religion, the greatest and most murderous violence against Muslims in the world, is at the hands of other Muslims; the Sunni-Shia religious wars have been raging since the 7th century and they rage on today all across the Islamic world. Thus, being a Muslim is no guarantee that other Muslims will "privilege" you as opposed to murder you. 

As the saying goes, one really cannot judge a book by its cover -- which brings me to the subject of race in American politics.

Why did some people vote for President Obama? The answer: He is a man who looks black and who ran a cool and charismatic game.

White America was atoning for the sin of institutionalized slavery; the fact that we are the only country that fought and won a bloody Civil War on this very issue was irrelevant, insufficient.

Now, we had finally elected our first black/African-American President.

But had we, really?

Obama's mother and the maternal grandparents who helped raise him were white, Caucasian. This did not matter. We judged him solely by his appearance and his considerable Ivy League charm, and not by his record--he had none.

As I read his autobiography, "Dreams From My Father," I became increasingly outraged by how little he mentioned his mother or grandparents and how much he magnified the role of his totally absent, alcoholic, wife-beating Kenyan father.

As a feminist, and a mother, I felt tremendously sorry for his mother who, although she herself had chosen a series of men of color as husbands and lovers, did not seem to merit much love or loyalty from her son.

Electing a good-looking "symbol" is not the same as electing the best candidate for the job. And lately, America has not had many stellar presidential candidates.

Now, we in New York City are expected to elect a mayor because his wife is African-American and their son looks totally black (just like President Obama). Bill de Blasio is using his 15-year-old son Dante in an ad to show and tell that de Blasio deserves both the black and the progressive vote because he married a black woman and has a son who looks all-black and who sports a very 60's style Afro.

No one should vote for de Blasio for this reason -- or for Bill Thompson merely because he is a black man.

Check out their records.

I will not vote for someone merely because she is a woman. I want to know where she stands on the issues, beginning with foreign policy and the economy as well as where she stands on women's issues.

I want to know the same things about any male candidate.

As the author of "Woman's Inhumanity to Woman," I know that women lawyers, judges, corporate executives, physicians, social workers, and professors can be very anti-woman. Prosecutors often do not want women on the jury when a rapist is being tried; they tend to disbelieve the victim and feel compassion for the alleged rapist.

Gender, race, religion, and sexual preference are not necessarily forms of victimization and we should not be voting for "victims" as a way of atoning for their suffering or for our prejudice.





headline: Why does Eric Holder want to deny poor Louisiana kids a good education?
byline: By Cal Thomas


Before Attorney General Eric Holder and the Justice Department move forward with a lawsuit to block vouchers for thousands of low-income students trapped in failing Louisiana public schools, he ought to speak to parents whose children benefit from the statewide voucher measured called the Louisiana Scholarship Program.

One of those parents is Lakisha Fuselier. Fuselier is a single mother of four. Her 8-year-old son, Albert, is a part of the voucher program.

A spokeswoman in Gov. Bobby Jindal’s office emailed me her story, which first appeared in The Daily Advertiser last December.

“Lakisha Fuselier wanted to do something to help her son, Albert. He was struggling in public school classes,” the Daily Advertiser writes. “His academic problems were compounded by a diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. … She knew he needed individual attention, something he was not getting in public school.”

Next to a right to life, the most important right is a good education. Without it, low-income children are denied the American Dream. It is the ultimate civil rights issue.

In response to my request, Ms. Fuselier provided the following statement to the governor’s office: “When I heard about this program, I jumped on the chance to try something new for my son. I see the difference it has made in him from an academic standpoint and as an individual. He loves school now and is more outgoing. I hope to be able to get my other kids in the program because I know that it works.”

Attorney General Holder’s stated reason for suing to eliminate the voucher program in Louisiana is that it “impedes the desegregation process.”

The government argues that allowing parents to transfer their children out of failing Louisiana schools would upset the racial balance of schools in districts still under federal desegregation orders.

“There’s no denying the state’s racist history of school segregation or its ugly efforts … to undermine desegregation orders…,” writes the Washington Post. “…But the situation today bears no resemblance to those terrible days. Since most of the students using vouchers are black, it is, as State Education Superintendent John White pointed out … ‘a little ridiculous’ to argue that the departure of mostly black students to voucher schools would make their home school systems less white.”

In a recent appearance on NBC's “Meet the Press,” Gov. Jindal said, “There are too many kids in this country today trapped in poor neighborhoods with poor, failing schools. In Louisiana, we’re doing something about it.” Is Holder really saying he’d rather they didn’t?

President and Mrs. Obama can provide private schooling for their daughters. The president’s attorney general wants to deny the same to Louisianians whose only hope out of poverty is a decent education. Is that fair? Is it just?

The Washington Post editorialized against the administration’s lawsuit, calling it “bewildering, if not downright perverse … to use the banner of civil rights to bring a misguided suit that would block these disadvantaged students from getting the better educational opportunities they are due.”

Next to a right to life, the most important right is a good education. Without it, low-income children are denied the American Dream. It is the ultimate civil rights issue.

The racial makeup of a school that fails to provide quality education shouldn’t matter. What difference does it make if a child fails in an all-black school or an integrated one?

An “F’ is an “F.”

According to The Weekly Standard, more people have applied for vouchers in Louisiana than are available: 10,000 in 2012, with only 5,000 receiving them, and 12,000 this year, with 8,000 awarded by lottery.

The magazine also notes that the voucher movement is spreading: “According to the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice, 23 states and the District of Columbia have a total of 48 voucher and tax-credit programs designed to help poor kids in bad schools get out…”

Education Secretary Arne Duncan tried to end the school choice program in D.C., but reversed himself in the face of a public outcry.

Minority parents should amplify that outcry in Louisiana and across the country.

If Republicans are smart, they will make school choice their issue and reclaim their history of being for civil rights before the Democrats commandeered it.

In a cruel reversal of what happened in the 1960s, Democrats now appear to stand in the schoolhouse door, trying to keep poor children out.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Syria and history
byline: By Cal Thomas


Perhaps if America had a successful track record in the Middle East, President Obama's appeal for a "limited" attack on Syria might carry more weight. But because our attention span in the region increasingly resembles that of a fidgety 4-year-old, an examination of recent history is in order.

Consider Iran. In 1979, President Jimmy Carter supported toppling the shah, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. Whatever the shah's shortcomings, who believes the theocratic government of the ayatollahs, which replaced him, was better than the one we helped overthrow? At least the shah was not pursuing nuclear weapons or fighting proxy wars like Syria.

Or Iraq. In 2003, President George W. Bush ordered an invasion of Iraq to topple Saddam Hussein and rid the country of weapons of mass destruction.

Remember the Iraqi refugee codenamed "Curveball"? He was the main provider of "intelligence" that Saddam was pursuing WMDs. No WMDs were ever found.

The secular West doesn't fully comprehend the religious motivations of extremists who claim to love death more than life.

In 2004, "Curveball" was officially classified a "fabricator" by the CIA; too late for those thousands of Americans who died or were wounded. Now, President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry say we can trust the intelligence on Syria. Do you?

Even if the videos showing dead Syrian children are real and the intelligence is accurate, that is still not sufficient reason to attack Syria. Given our experience with Iran and Iraq -- and the increased likelihood that growing instability in Afghanistan, Libya, possibly Egypt and even Lebanon might turn out unfavorably for the U.S., what makes anyone think history won't repeat itself?

Anyone who has spent time in the Middle East knows things are not always what they seem. Alliances and loyalties shift depending on who is most likely to win a power struggle. The secular West doesn't fully comprehend the religious motivations of extremists who claim to love death more than life. Getting killed by missiles launched by people they regard as "infidels," they say, transports them to paradise. How does America deal with that?

Former Israeli diplomat Yoram Ettinger wrote to me in an email: "The Syrian threat to vital U.S. interests ... is a derivative of Iran's regional and global megalomaniac aspirations. The focus must be on the source and not on the derivative! Shifting attention from Iran to Syria provides Iran with extra time to develop nuclear capabilities."

Exactly. The Middle East is imploding and if the U.S. continues with the fiction that it can make things better, or that freedom "is the hope of every heart," as former President Bush likes to say, we will be sucked into its vortex with no escape.

A recent headline in The Weekly Standard, which editorially favors a strike against Syria, branded the region "The Muddle East."

Reuel Marc Gerecht, a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, writes, "...Obama's sensibilities -- his early friendly outreach to Muslim despots and Iran, his reluctance to apply pressure to authoritarian Muslim rulers, and his obvious discomfort with the moral challenges of American power -- made him particularly diffident. ... Barack Obama is now the American everyone in the region loves to hate."

Having proved the wrongheadedness of pacification ("pacification" also failed in Vietnam), the president seeks authority to push forward and repeat the mistakes of the recent past.

The war we are in has less to do with Syria than with transnational forces like the Muslim Brotherhood and Al Qaeda.

Ettinger writes that these radical groups "(aspire) to sweep the Middle East and beyond, first and foremost the remaining pro-U.S. Arab regimes such as Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and other oil-producing Gulf states."

They will then come here. In fact, Clare M. Lopez, writing for the Gatestone Institute, a nonpartisan, not-for-profit international policy council, maintains there is ample evidence they have already infiltrated America, Great Britain and other parts of Europe.

A limited strike on Syria will do nothing to stop them. Learning from history, listening to what they say and watching what they do and confronting this evil, rather than trying to pacify it, is America's best option.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: A universal prayer for Rosh Hashanah
byline: By Rabbi Abraham Cooper


In 2008, the Simon Wiesenthal Center received an unusual request for help—from the government of Iraq. Their U.N. Mission wanted our help to mount an exhibition on the 30th anniversary of Saddam Hussein’s gassing of his fellow (Kurdish) Iraqi citizens.

A few weeks later, I found myself, together with my colleague Liebe Geft, at a Muslim cemetery in the town of Halabja, amidst the mass graves of Saddam’s victims.

What prayer does an Orthodox rabbi say for the victims of poison gas, a crime that breached a red line once thought unthinkable after the Nazi Holocaust?

I could think of no Psalm from King David’s lips that could penetrate the utter desolation of the place, for a crime that never should have been, for innocents whose lives should never have been snuffed out.

We desperately need a humbled humanity reinvested with a sense of awe of the majesty of this world.

All I could think about was the reaction of Simon Wiesenthal back in 1988 immediately after the poison gas attack in Iraq. The great Nazi hunter, who lost 89 members of his family in the Holocaust, said these prophetic words to me:

“By doing nothing, the world is making a terrible mistake. Tyrants will interpret our silence and inaction in ways that will come back to haunt us in the future.”

We can only imagine how our world would be different today, had a ‘coalition of the willing’ taken on Saddam, then and there.

At the minimum, we could have avoided two Gulf Wars, the American invasion of Iraq and the loss and pain of so many U.S. soldiers and civilians across the region.

And, had Saddam been held accountable in 1988, today, another heartless tyrant, Bashar Assad, would not have the guts to deploy sarin gas on his fellow Syrian men, women and children.

Without question, President Obama was right to draw a red line when it first became clear a year ago that Assad was deploying North Korean-supplied poison gas in the midst of Syria’s unending and deadly civil war.

Now he is asking Congress to back military action against Assad, a call the Simon Wiesenthal Center endorses.

If America fails to act, we render meaningless all of the 'Never Again' pledges made by political leaders. We will empower Assad to strike again and will certainly increase the odds that his allies in Tehran might crossthe other 'red line'that would soon threatens to menace Israel, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf States with a nuclear-tipped Armageddon.

Which brings me back to Halabja.

The Simon Wiesenthal Center did in fact help create an exhibit with Iraq at U.N. Headquarters in New York that finally enabled Kurds—thirty years later-- to put a human face on their martyrs of Saddam Hussein’s crimes against humanity.

Standing amidst their mass graves the words for a prayer for Halabja’s victims finally came to me. They come from the opening words of our High Holy Days sacred Amidah devotion.

On the anniversary of the creation of the world, Jews do not begin with a plea for our families’ good health and fortune, nor for Israel’s wellbeing. These are the words we say:

“O Hashem our God, instill your awe upon all Your works, and Your fear and dread upon all you have created…”

Today there is no shortage of terrorists who scream “God is Great” as they butcher Muslims at prayer in mosques, destroy Churches, murder Christian students and Jewish school children.

Such people do not sanctify God; they and their cynical teachers diminish and desecrate God’s Name and the very reason He put us here in the first place.

This Rosh Hashanah I will repeat the prayer I chanted in Halabja with renewed fervor.

We desperately need a humbled humanity reinvested with a sense of awe of the majesty of this world and with our arrogance tamped down by the knowledge that ultimately each of us will be held accountable by a higher authority that will ask just one question: “Were you your brother’s keeper?”





headline: SOUL FOOD: No five-year-old dreams of becoming a drug dealer or a prostitute
byline: By Kelly Wright


"Nobody when they're four- or five- years-old says, "I want to be a gang-banger,a drug dealer, a prostitute, or I want to hurt people."

Teresa Goines, the founder of Old Skool Cafe in San Francisco, is the person who said those wise words to me. She runs an incredible program for helping at risk youth. She points out that when young early childhood students express what they dream of becoming, they will talk about becoming a doctor, firefighter, policeman, or teacher.

Goines says every little child comes into the world with passion and dreams of living a full and productive life. However, she adds "because of situations that they're born into, they get really hurt and those dreams get dashed. Then, there's pain upon pain. The result is that hurting people will hurt people.” With that, Goines believes the trauma of a child's dream being shattered leads to the child acting out and making poor choices.

Teresa Goines believes every little child comes into the world with passion and dreams of living a full and productive life.

Goines explains that her story began after graduating from Westmont College. Armed with a degree in Psychology and an abundance of faith in God, Goines, at the age of 22, became a Corrections Officer at a juvenile boot camp in California. The teens under her supervision were convicted of every crime imaginable; drug dealing, gang violence, and worse.

Goines said her experience in corrections and background in psychology enabled her to realize that beyond the teen inmates' tough and menacing, some of them were actually tender, thoughtful and hungry for a chance to do better. Goines told me; "God really used them to break my heart for knowing that this is my calling and I have to do something about this,"

Not content to just sit idly by, watching more boys go to prison as a rite of passage, Teresa felt a special call upon her life to make a difference. Instead of working with youth after they were on lockdown, she aspired to help keep teens from getting into a vicious cycle of trouble that would lead to incarceration. So, Teresa embarked on an unusual quest to help deliver hope to teens that were hopeless.

She created Old Skool Cafe, a faith-based youth run supper club. She hires at risk youth or those who have been incarcerated to learn every aspect of the business. The teens are trained on how to become chefs, waiters, hosts, entertainers and managers. They even learn how to hire and fire employees. When they're not working, they are required to take classes on character development, conflict resolution and leadership. And they are required to finish high school.

It seems when we're not talking about war in foreign lands, we are often talking about the domestic war of teen violence.

We have a name for such troubled teens. We call them “at-risk youth.” It's a label we attach to them meaning they are less likely to succeed.

Statistics show they are destined for failure and poverty. Some people in America look at the youth in such neighborhoods and merely write them off as "lost causes."

I call that kind of thinking very shallow and feckless. 

Instead, I see teen violence as an insidious evil that must be discussed and confronted.

Recent stories in the news about teen crime have focused on black on white attacks in Oklahoma, Florida and Washington State.

After each of those incidents, many news commentators angrily demanded that civil rights leaders Al Sharpton, Ben Jealous and Rev. Jesse Jackson show the same kind of outrage for these acts of violence as they had for the Travon Martin case.

Really?

Are we really becoming the kind of society wherein we base every response to senseless acts of violence on the race of the perpetrator and the victim?

Here's a wakeup call for all of us. It's not a black thing or a white thing, or a Hispanic/Latino thing. Crime is an evil thing. Pure and simple. It stems from the depravity of humanity.

I think Goines has a better view of the situation we find ourselves in and the way out:

"I totally believe in transformation, restoration and healing. I believe that when troubled teens begin to see themselves for who they truly are, for who God called them to be. They will see themselves as God sees them; valuable, precious and created for a great purpose. Then they start to act that way. When you call out the gold in them, they will become gold."

Goines like to refer to scripture when she talks about her outreach to troubled teens, “There’s a verse in the Bible that says that love is the greatest of all these things. There’s so many things you can do. There’s so many things you can do. There’s great gifts you can share, there’s acts of kindness. But, really, love is the most powerful weapon. And, when you love people, love changes people."





headline: The weakening of America -- Obama and Benghazi one year later
byline: By Erick Stakelbeck


One year later, and the blood of Ambassador Christopher Stevens still cries out from the ground.

So does that of Sean Smith, Glenn Doherty and Tyrone Woods who, along with Stevens, were murdered at the hands of Al Qaeda-linked terrorists in a siege of the U. S consulate in Benghazi, Libya on September 11, 2012.

Despite President Obama’s pledge to “hunt down” the Islamic jihadists who slaughtered those four brave Americans in cold blood, to date, not one suspect has been killed or apprehended.

This despite the fact that one of the main suspects in the attack, Ahmed Khattala, has granted lengthy interviews to the New York Times, CNN and several other American news outlets and saunters around the streets of Libya in plain sight even today, almost daring the Obama administration to come get him.

The multiple lies, cover-ups and brazen disinterest on the part of the Obama administration in seeking justice for Amb. Stevens and his colleagues is one of the most shameful episodes in the history of American foreign policy.

Khattala has good reason to feel safe. Over the course of the past year, Obama administration officials have gone from falsely blaming the Benghazi assault on an obscure YouTube video about Mohammed (current National Security Advisor Susan Rice) to whining “what difference does it make” (former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton) to, finally, throwing their hands in the air and dismissing Benghazi altogether as just another GOP-driven “phony scandal” (President Obama himself).

Yes, Ahmed Khattala must be quaking in his sandals.

The multiple lies, cover-ups and brazen disinterest on the part of the Obama administration in seeking justice for Stevens and his colleagues comprise one of the most shameful episodes in the history of American foreign policy. Perhaps the most maddening aspect of the Benghazi siege—again, a premeditated terror attack by an Al Qaeda linked outfit on a U.S. consulate that left four Americans dead—is that we’ll likely never get some of the more crucial questions surrounding it answered.

Just where was President Obama as the entire seven-hour-plus ordeal was unfolding?

Whose idea was it to concoct the YouTube clip lie and parade Rice in front of a national television audience to trumpet it five days after the attack?

Why did the CIA reportedly have dozens of personnel on the ground in Benghazi the night of the attack?

Why is the Obama administration going to such great lengths to suppress any testimony about Benghazi?

Virginia Congressman Frank Wolf, for one, has charged that the administration may have been supplying weapons gathered in Libya to Syrian rebels and is seeking to cover its tracks. That would help explain the CIA assets on the ground in Benghazi.

Wolf’s theory makes a lot of sense, given the fondness the Obama White House has shown for supporting Islamist revolutionaries everywhere from Egypt to, ironically enough, Libya.

This decision to back—even arm—radical Islamists is a stunning turn of events.

Today, on September 11, 2013, one year after the Benghazi attack and just twelve years removed from 9/11, the U.S. government is throwing its weight behind forces—whether Al-Qaeda types in Syria or Muslim Brotherhooders in Egypt and elsewhere—that share the exact same totalitarian, anti-American ideology as the jihadists who brought down the Twin Towers.

Which begs the question: what exactly do we have to show for twelve years of American blood and treasure expended in the War on Terror?

President Obama’s willfully misleading claims during the 2012 campaign season that Al Qaeda was “on the run” and “nearing defeat” notwithstanding, AQ and its allies and affiliates now cover more geographical ground than they did on 9/11: from Pakistan and Iraq to Syria, Yemen, Somalia, Libya, North Africa, Sinai, Nigeria, Algeria, Europe and beyond.

Likewise, Al Qaeda’s ideology has inspired a generation of young followers in the West, resulting in the kind of terror and mayhem we saw unleashed by the Tsarnaev brothers in Boston last April.

At the same time, the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism, Iran, continues its march towards nuclear weapons and along with its jihadist proxy, Hezbollah, is establishing a presence throughout Latin America, at our very doorstep.

In addition, while the Muslim Brotherhood may be down in Egypt right now, it is anything but out. The world’s first modern Islamist terrorist organization has affiliates in some 70 countries worldwide and remains wildly influential, including among Muslim communities here in the United States.

From closing down U.S. embassies en masse last month, to farming out its Syria policy to Putin’s Russia, to propping up the Morsi dictatorship in Egypt and throwing Israel under the bus at every turn, the Obama administration has projected stunning weakness, uncertainty and ignorance and overseen a series of foreign policy disasters that have whittled down America’s influence in the Middle East to almost nil.

And thanks to the Benghazi debacle, our enemies now believe that American blood comes cheap.





headline: A summer well-spent at The Watermill Center
byline: By Walter Hanna


Editor's note: Watermill Center in Water Mill, New York was founded in 1992 by Artistic Director Robert Wilson. For the past 17 years, the principal activity of The Watermill Center has been the International Summer Program led by Wilson. Each summer approximately 60 - 100 artists from over 30 nations gather at Watermill for 5 weeks of intense creative exploration and artistic development. The Summer Program provides a unique opportunity for emerging artists to learn from established professionals in a laboratory environment.

In 2011, I realized I had studied and admired the work of artist and theater director Robert Wilson for the greater part of a decade and still had not met him.

To give a little information about my background I underwent my first B.A. in Communication and Cultural Studies from Curtin University in Australia and my second BA (First Class Honours) in Acting from LASALLE College of the Arts in Singapore.

I was fortunate to finally cross paths with Wilson after he gave a lecture in Singapore. We had an amusing discussion about playwright Arthur Miller before he told me I should apply for his summer program.

I had no idea what he was talking about but I smiled and nodded and promised I would swiftly submit my application to make the deadline (which was the following day).

It is a totally unique experience to see how the greatest living visual artist generates the quantity of art he does, while still maintaining an unmatched quality.

I applied and was accepted into the program, flew half -way around the world to attend a program I had little information about.


The nerves as I boarded the Jitney to Southampton from New York were immense.

Have I made the right decision surrendering 5 weeks to this project, I wondered. Will anything professionally develop from this workshop? Who will employ me for my next show?

I decided to enter the program without expectations and to just take the experience for what it was, whatever that may be.

The program is divided into two sections: pre- and post the annual Watermill benefit.

Before the benefit our goal is to get the property in order for the event, erect installations, plant thousands (yes, thousands) of blueberry bushes, rehearse performances and prepare for over 1,000 guests to arrive.

The pace is extreme and the quantity of work is enormous.

I can’t lie and say that it’s easy, but it is through this intense workload that you form guttural bonds with the other participants in an unusually short period of time.

For an artist in 2013, the value of networking with other international artists has never been so important and is one of the most rewarding facets of the program.

And then there is the pay-off in the latter three weeks of the program where we work on up to twelve workshops for Wilson’s future work, from visual installations, to staging workshops of theatre and opera pieces, to design workshops for new video portraits.

What I appreciate so much about this time is the diversity in the workshops. Some of the productions are in the early stages of development and you have an opportunity to shape how the project will eventuate. 

Also, I am a professional actor, but I am not limited solely to performance at The Watermill Center. The program gives me the opportunity to look into and develop skills in designing, directing, dramaturgy, and even carpentry.

The grounds of The Watermill Center itself also must be mentioned. They are simply stunning. 

Wilson has all his art spread out across the eight and half acres. Nothing is off limits and you are literally living and working amongst his unbelievable art collection.

We also have access to the Library of Inspiration, which has countless archives of Wilson’s work as well as work from other visual and performance artists.

Wilson opens up his world to the participants and it is a totally unique experience to see how the greatest living visual artist generates the quantity of art he does, while still maintaining an unmatched quality.

Also, as we work seven days a week at the center, it is a wonderful reminder on how productive we can be as humans and how relatively lazy we all our in our regular “non-Watermill life.”

This is my second experience at The Watermill Center and I now feel that I’m officially a part of the family. I am surrounded by inspirational people everyday and I am so grateful to have gained admission for this second year, to establish these long lasting friendships and to work with the visionary that is artist Robert Wilson.





headline: Sun Tzu would not be happy with Obama's plans for Syria strike
byline: By Lt. Col. Tony Shaffer (ret.)


Sun Tzu: “Tactics without strategy is the noise before defeat.”

We have heard a lot of noise over the past week from the White House…and we are about to hear a whole lot more…

The president intends to conduct a surgical military strike against Syria in the near future because Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad violated international norms to send a message. And despite the limited duration of any such planned military action and the lack of clear and achievable objective there is a frightening gap between Obama's rhetoric and the reality we face.

The old adage applies here: plan for the worst, but hope for the best. However, “hope” is not a strategy and it is not a sound policy regarding Syria.

It is time for President Obama to level with the American people and Congress.

The White House needs to expand its horizon and create realistic expectations of what any military action will bring. 

Surgical strikes never go exactly as planned. 

Many experts believe Assad will not heed the message and will instead continue to act illogically and use chemical weapons against his people, again. 

What are we to do then; what then are our options; what will be the cost of the next move and the next move after that?

Congress is more aware than the president to the reality of political backlash that will come with the blind use of U.S. unilateral military force; and in the end what are our options if the message carried by our cruise missiles and manned bombers does not take?

Will we be obligated to widen our message to even more expensive deployments of more military force and troops?

Some in Congress have considered using the Syria strike as an excuse to kill the reduction in rate of budget growth (also known as the "sequester") – therefore, this limited military action is unjustifiable both from the known expense – and the huge secondary expense that would likely follow.

This is the reality we face: any miss of our weapons will have tragic second and third order consequences that will expand the expense and scope of the conflict. 

Are we ready for global escalation if any external casualties such as, a Russian technician or several Quds Force Iranian troops are accidentally killed?

The Iranians have already threatened us and the Russians have stated they will side with Syria in any conflict – is the White House prepared for this potential – are we prepared for an investment of our blood and treasure in another expensive, unfocused, ill-conceived war?

More importantly, imagine for just a second that we are wildly successful and degrade Assad’s military command and control so well that he is no longer able to launch chemical weapons attacks. 

The secondary effect of our action will be to eliminate his ability to control, via his chain of command, the stockpiles of chemical weapons. What if we render him unable to guarantee these weapons security? Are we prepared to put the 75,000 boots on the ground to secure them? 

Clearly it would not be an “international norm” for us to simply leave these chemical weapons available to the rebels – so how far are we prepared to go? 

Syria is a symptom of a larger problem. Over the past 12 years (since the 9/11 attack) tactics to counter terror have distracted us from achieving any strategic focus. 

We have now, as we have for the past decade, the finest, most lethal fighting force that mankind has ever seen. 

There is no doubt that we would quickly dispatch any military challenger. From Fallujah, Iraq to Gardyz, Afghanistan, to other secret battles that are not yet public – we have won hundreds of tactical engagements and yet, somehow, we have yet to win a single strategic victory. 

During World War II there was a clear strategy that was followed bring victory in that war in less than five years.

During the Cold War, there was a very clear strategy of containment and mutually assured destruction and all tactics were based on insuring the success of these larger strategies.

Our great tactical capacity now drives our Pentagon budget and creates the temptation for politicians to this lethal capability without regard to a strategy that would focus our efforts to achieve global success.

There is no clear national interest for Congress and the American people to get behind regarding Syria – and no strategy behind which we can all pull together and support. We are now in an era of dominance without purpose. 

We have great weapon systems, great men and women manning them, and the ability to use them anywhere on the planet in a time of our choosing…but for what purpose? 

Syria is not a justifiable purpose.

We, as a nation, cannot achieve success if we fail to establish a strategic objective – to begin with what we wish to accomplish in mind. 

We have waited too long to engage on the Syria issue and we are now reacting to this lose/lose prospect in Syria. 

We must establish a strategy that allows us to anticipate events; not allowing events to shape us.

There are things we can and should do to truly help the people of Syria. But simply conducting a punitive military strike will only make things worse for them and us. 

We have options –diplomatic, special operations, humanitarian, and transnational or international coalition - that we must examine before we act with a kinetic option. 

It is time for President Obama to level with the American people and Congress – to tell them how bad things could get if we fail in this quick kinetic action. In addition, formulate a strategy that allows for U.S. engagement, and, dare I say, long term success and victory. 





headline: Obama, Syria and the perils of 'red line' declarations
byline: By Danielle Pletka


Amidst a heated and confused debate on the question of U.S. intervention in Syria, President Obama made one of his infrequent appearances before the press to explain the red line he laid down more than a year ago regarding the use of chemical weapons. “First of all, I didn’t set a red line. The world set a red line,” Obama said.

Setting aside the fact that this is, at best, a tortured locution (as the president did indeed say, “a red line for us is we start seeing a whole bunch of chemical weapons moving around or being utilized”), Obama’s attempt to rewrite his own rhetoric has obscured an important lesson: Red lines are too often idle threats that hamstring the good guys without constraining the bad.

Predictability in international affairs is a virtue.

The better rogue nations understand the boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable behavior, the less likely they will transgress.

Obama effectively partnered with Assad in April 2013, insisting it was not clear that chemical weapons had been used by the Syrian dictator. 

It is this principle that drives the United Nations collective to sign treaties, lay down markers and otherwise insist – most often with no enforcing mechanism – that things like nuclear weapons proliferation, chemical and biological weapons production and use, and other objectionable things like torture and genocide are verboten.

But failure to enforce those norms is the rule rather than the exception.Bashar al-Assad has been murdering by the tens of thousands -- nominal crimes against humanity -- facing little other than verbal censure.

Iran, North Korea and others have violated numerous treaties without facing military action, at least not yet. And so, it flows naturally that most fail to take seriously the strictures of international treaties and norms.

Clearly, this happens at the country level as well. Both the United States and Israel have set numerous red lines regarding Iran’s illicit nuclear weapons programs.

Over the last decade, those red lines have changed repeatedly, moving to accommodate Iran’s progress towards a nuclear weapons arsenal. Not surprisingly, only when faced with the specter of imminent military action, have the Iranians hesitated slightly with their onward march.

But there is another, more pernicious element to the red line ultimatum: The authority laying down his marker also has a problem once his imaginary tripwire is triggered.

He must either admit frankly that a red line has been crossed, and act accordingly, or he must enter into a silent partnership with the transgressor, insisting there is no actionable information.

Obama effectively partnered with Assad in April 2013, insisting it was not clear that chemical weapons had been used by the Syrian dictator.

Similarly over the years, Bill Clinton joined with then Palestinian Liberation Organization leader in insisting that the PLO was not violating U.S. law by engaging in terrorism; George Bush sided with the Government of Pakistan in insisting Islamabad was not harboring or supporting terrorists, which would have led to a cut off of aid; and Israel has silently teamed up with the Iranian regime to insist that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s red lines on nuclear enrichment have not been crossed. (They have.)

So too, Obama made his pronouncement regarding Syrian use of chemical weapons in August of 2012, in the context of an election in which he was being accused of being weak on national security.

The remark, widely reported as being off the cuff and beyond the president’s intended talking points, had the effect of constraining Obama (and not, apparently, Assad).Once faced with the obvious and wanton use of chemical weapons by the Syrian dictator, Obama had to act or risk looking a fool.

The president clearly realized his dilemma when he responded to reports of 1,400 dead in the suburbs of Damascus in late August. He could not fudge the question of whether his red line had been crossed as he did after the earlier chemical weapons attack. Small wonder, then, that having tested the president once and succeeded, Assad believed he could do so again with impunity.

In a perfect world, a red line laid down by a credible and powerful nation or set of nations would provide a deterrent to bad actors. But this is not a perfect world, and when the will to enforce red lines is so clearly in doubt, it’s time to consider the wisdom of drawing them in the first place.





headline: Why would anyone quit working for Google?
byline: By Adam Lewis


Was the character of Billy McMahon (played by Vince Vaughn) in the film, "The Internship," the final straw that killed Google’s once famed interview riddles?

Less than a week after “The Internship” appeared in theaters, the tech megalith confirmed the rumors and publicly admitted that the riddles it used to evaluate job candidates are in fact a poor predictor of performance – and it has scrapped them once and for all.

No longer will Google’s job applicants have to answer puzzling questions like, “How many golf balls do you think will fit into a school bus?” (Probably around 500,000.) Or, “How much should you charge to wash all the windows in Seattle?” (Around $10 per window – it’s a trick question.)

According to PayScale, a payroll consultancy, Google’s ranks near the very top among companies with high employee turnover. The median tenure is just over a year.

In an unusually candid interview with Adam Bryant at the New York Times, Laszlo Bock, senior vice president of people operations at Google, disclosed that, “On the hiring side, we found that brainteasers are a complete waste of time...They don’t predict anything. They serve primarily to make the interviewer feel smart.”

The discovery was part of a massive job-interview-vs.-job-performance metadata crunch, which Mr. Bock summed up thusly: “It’s a complete random mess.”

That’s right. For the countless hours and untold millions of dollars spent interviewing job candidates, Google found no relationship whatsoever between the scores interviewers gave to new hires and actual performance on the job.

This soul-searching may have actually helped Google answer one riddle that has stumped many: Why are retention rates so low at such a hot company?

Google boasts some of the best benefits in the private sector, consistently topping Fortune Magazine’s list of best companies to work for. There are the top-tier basics like great health insurance and retirement benefits, but Google goes the extra mile with perks like free gourmet food, gym access, physician’s care, and legal advice on demand.

Yet according to PayScale, a payroll consultancy, Google’s ranks near the very top among companies with high employee turnover. The median tenure is just over a year.

Some point out (correctly) that Google’s reputation and the quality of its staff mean that they are often poached by other companies, or leave to set up their own ventures. But Google’s median retention rate is lower than comparable companies, like Yahoo (2.4 years) and Microsoft (4 years).

The real answer seems to be an inefficient hiring process. So if traditional interviews and riddles fail, what works?

According to Mr. Bock, “Structured behavioral interviews, where you have a consistent rubric for how you assess people, rather than having each interviewer just make stuff up.”

That realization puts Google among a small but fast-growing group of companies who are moving away from the traditional job interview process in favor of a more standardized (to better compare candidates) and personalized (focusing on the specific characteristics that are needed for the role) system.

Companies need different skills and personality traits depending on the job: For a store manager, a calm and engaging temperament is prized, while for a role in the accounting department math skills rank higher.

Forward-thinking human resources teams are today using an even stronger performance indicator: the situational judgment test. This incorporates recent breakthroughs in behavioral science.

As Adam Grant at the Wharton School has explained, they are an effective predictor of success because they not only establish a standard against which all candidates can be assessed, but also allow employers to assess skills directly relevant to the job at hand.

Moreover, these types of interviews can be conducted just as effectively over the Internet as in the room with a would-be employer, substantially increasing the quality of data available to screen candidates while minimizing resources wasted on doomed interviews.

Standardizing questions and personalizing them to the needs of the company also helps in the long run: companies can see how their best performing employees answered questions, so they know what to look for in new hires. And collecting and analyzing these types of data increases transparency in the hiring process, which supports evidence-based decision-making.

Google is not the first victim of a faulty hiring system, and it won’t be the last. But the result is the same wherever you go: Bad hires means high turnover.

Depending on the industry, turnover can run from $3,000 for low-wage jobs to upwards of $25,000 per employee, according to a compilation of studies done by Sasha Corporation, a human resources consultancy. Luckily for many, the answer to the hiring riddle is readily available.





headline: Obama White House needs to get its message straight on Syria or it will never win support for strike
byline: By Dana Perino


I realize the last thing the White House wants from me is communications advice. And, goodness knows, President Obama has plenty of advisers all weighing in on the public relations push to get Congress (and the American people) to support an intervention in Syria.

Yet, there’s something about the administration’s messaging that has been striking a discordant note to my ears. I’m not sure that they understand what I, and many of the people they need to convince, are hearing.

Regardless of whether one is for or against a Syria strike, the onus is on the president to make his case convincingly.

Unfortunately for the president’s advisers, the more Obama speaks about Syria the more uneasy people seem to get.

Over the course of this past week, the arguments against a military intervention in Syria seem to be winning the debate.

To try to turn that tide, the White House has had President Obama speak publicly on several occasions during his trip to the G-20 meeting in Russia.

Unfortunately for the president’s advisers, the more Obama speaks, the more uneasy people seem to get.

That’s when a communications team needs to pull back and ask themselves, “why?”
In my opinion, Mr. Obama is presenting his case incorrectly. He has the order and the emphasis wrong when laying out his arguments in favor of a strike. He’s been putting too much stress on the limited point, that the intervention will be limited, targeted and over before you know it. 

Instead, he should first argue that a strike is necessary. Then he should tell us why he thinks we will succeed. And only then should he get to the point that a strike is not going to become a long-term or costly endeavor. 

The more the president keeps jumping to, and spending too much time on, the limited aspect of the strike, the more he’s taking for granted that he’s already won the argument on the first two points. And clearly he has not. 

This is a common situation with political leaders – their words often reflect the mindset of their party, and in this case limited seems more important than anything else, even efficacy.

The Democrats started asking what the limits would be on military action even before they ask whether it will be successful. 

The thing is, President Obama didn’t initially need to win over the Democrats – he could have had their support with a minimal effort from the White House. 

By focusing on the far-left echo chamber he alienated the rest of the nation, so that with every communication from the White House about a Syria strike the gap has grown between what the administration plans to do and what they are doing that won’t get, as one U.S. official said, “mocked.”

If the president has any hopes of getting the votes he needs in Congress, and winning in the court of public opinion, here’s what he must do to win the argument:

1. Tell American the strike is necessary and here's why.
2. Let Americans know we can succeed, and here's why.
3. Promise the strike wilI be limited, and here's how.

If the White House decides that President Obama should make his case Tuesday in a prime time address, he could still change course and use this construction.

All that said, it may still be too late.





headline: TODD'S AMERICAN DISPATCH: Christian bakery closes after LGBT threats, protests
byline: By Todd Starnes


A family-owned Christian bakery, under investigation for refusing to bake a wedding cake for a lesbian couple, has been forced to close its doors after a vicious boycott by militant homosexual activists.

Sweet Cakes By Melissa posted a message on its Facebook page alerting customers that their Gresham, Ore. retail store would be shut down after months of harassment from pro-gay marriage forces.

“Better is a poor man who walks in integrity than a rich man who is crooked in his ways,” read a posting from Proverbs on the bakery’s Facebook page.

“The LGBT attacks are the reason we are shutting down the shop. They have killed our business through mob tactics.”- Aaron Klein, owner, Sweet Cakes By Melissa

“It’s a sad day for Christian business owners and it’s a sad day for the First Amendment,” owner Aaron Klein told me. “The LGBT attacks are the reason we are shutting down the shop. They have killed our business through mob tactics.”

Last January, Aaron and Melissa Klein made national headlines when they refused to bake a wedding cake for a lesbian couple.

Klein tells me he has nothing against homosexuals -- but because of their religious faith, the family simply cannot take part in gay wedding events.

“I believe marriage is between a man and a woman,” he said. “I don’t want to help somebody celebrate a commitment to a lifetime of sin.”

The lesbian couple filed a discrimination with the Oregon Bureau of Labor and Industries and told their story to local newspapers and television statements.

Within days, militant homosexuals groups launched protests and boycotts. Klein told me he received messages threatening to kill his family. They hoped his children would die.

The LGBT protestors then turned on other wedding vendors around the community. They threatened to boycott any florists, wedding planners or other vendors that did business with Sweet Cakes By Melissa.

“That tipped the scales,” Klein said. “The LGBT activists inundated them with phone calls and threatened them. They would tell our vendors, ‘If you don’t stop doing business with Sweet Cakes By Melissa, we will shut you down.’”

To make matters worse, the Oregon’s Bureau of Labor and Industries announced last month they had launched a formal discrimination investigation against the Christian family.

Commissioner Brad Avakian told The Oregonian that he was committed to a fair and thorough investigation to determine whether the bakery discriminated against the lesbians.

“Everybody is entitled to their own beliefs, but that doesn’t mean that folks have the right to discriminate,” he told the newspaper. “The goal is to rehabilitate. For those who do violate the law, we want them to learn from that experience and have a good, successful business in Oregon.”

In other words, Christians who live and work in Oregon must follow man’s law instead of God’s law. But in a show of benevolence, the state is willing to rehabilitate and reeducate Christian business owners like the Kleins.

Klein said the closing of their retail store was a small price to pay for standing up for their religious beliefs.

“As a man of faith, I am in good spirits,” he said. “I’m happy to be serving the Lord and standing up for what’s right.”

Klein said what’s happened to Sweet Cakes By Melissa should be a warning to other Christians across the nation.

“This is a fight that’s been coming for a while,” he said. “Be prepared to take a stand. Hopefully, the church will wake up and understand that we are under attack right now.”

Just last month, New Mexico’s Supreme Court ruled that two Christian photographers who declined to photograph a same-sex union violated the state’s Human Rights Act. One justice said the photographers were “compelled by law to compromise the very religious beliefs that inspire their lives.”

Denver baker Jack Phillips is facing possible jail time for refusing to bake a cake for a gay wedding.

The Colorado Attorney General’s office filed a formal complaint against Phillips, the owner of Masterpiece Cake Shop. A hearing before the state’s civil rights commission is set for later this month.

In Indianapolis, a family-owned cookie shop faced a discrimination investigation after they refused to make rainbow cookies for National Coming Out Day.

A T-shirt company in Lexington, Ky. found itself at the center of a Human Rights Commission investigation after they refused to make T-shirts for a local gay rights organization.

Klein said it’s becoming clear that Christians do not have the “right to believe what we believe.”

In other words, gay rights trump religious rights.

Aaron and Melissa Klein tell me they will continue to bake wedding cakes from their home. He’s already taken a full-time job to pay the bills and feed their five children.

Mrs. Klein told television station KPTV her philosophy remains unchanged by recent events.

“The Bible tells us to flee from sin,” she said. “I don’t think making a cake for it helps. I guess in my mind I thought we lived in a lot nicer of a world where everybody tolerated everybody.”

The plight of the Klein family exposes the true nature of the left. Those who preach tolerance and diversity are the least tolerant and the least diverse of all.





headline: Obama's Gulf of Tonkin resolution
byline: By Frank J. Gaffney, Jr.


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee (SFRC) Wednesday adopted, with bipartisan support, a resolution approving a strike on Syria that is being presented as limited in scope and duration.

In fact, it is likely to prove at least as much a blank-check as the notorious Vietnam-era Gulf of Tonkin resolution that was used to rationalize and authorize U.S. military involvement in Southeast Asia and a succession of hugely costly increases in what we now call our “boots on the ground” there.

What we have here is a classic bait-and-switch.

To be sure, there is language restricting the presence of ground forces, micromanaging the targeting of other elements and establishing a maximum ninety-day deadline to bring U.S. military operations in Syria to a halt.

But, thanks to Senator John McCain’s determined efforts to embroil the United States in Syria’s civil war, the SFRC-approved resolution also establishes as American “strategy” the objective of “changing the momentum on the battlefield.”

What we have here is a classic bait-and-switch. 

And it explicitly endorses “the provision of all forms of assistance” to the opposition’s military and political elements.

Not much imagination is required to see how such formulations, if ultimately approved by the Congress, would enable the Obama administration to engage to whatever extent it fancies in the overthrow of Bashar al-Assad’s regime.

Tactical strikes like those that helped Islamists topple Libyan dictator Muammar Qaddafi can be called in. And any form weaponry – including man-portable surface-to-air missiles, night-vision technology, rocket-propelled grenades, etc. – could be made available to an opposition that swears fealty to the Al Nusrah Front, a movement dominated by Islamists and designated a terrorist group by the U.S. State Department.

That being the case, it is an open question against whom such weapons might ultimately be used.

Proponents, of course, will seek to allay concerns on this score by pointing to language in the resolution requiring “efforts to isolate extremist and terrorist groups in Syria to prevent their influence on the future transitional and permanent Syrian government.”

It also directs that assistance will only go to those opposition elements that have been “properly and fully vetted and share common values and interests with the United States.”

Yet, the Obama administration and Senator McCain have been notoriously insistent that Islamists like the Muslim Brotherhood are “moderates” and people we can do business with.

Indeed, with McCain’s strong encouragement, the U.S. government under Mr. Obama has engaged, legitimated, empowered, funded and in some cases even armed the Brotherhood.

The rationale? They sufficiently “share our values” to be a bulwark against violent Islamists of the Al Qaeda stripe. As we have seen in Egypt, that is simply not the case.

Even if the Senate Foreign Relation Committee’s resolution did not provide a basis for embroiling the United States in Syria’s civil war on the side of the Muslim Brotherhood and Al Qaeda, it still would be deeply problematic.

If approved by Congress in its present form, it would represent an implicit, if not explicit, endorsement of the U.N. doctrine known as “the responsibility to protect” (R2P).

Again, there is a sleight-of-hand at work here. No mention is made of R2P in the resolution. We are being told simply that the United States military must be put in the service of punishing Assad for his alleged use of chemical weapons against innocent civilians.

Yet, as President Obama brazenly asserted Wednesday (the facts to the contrary notwithstanding), this is a “red line” established, not by him, but by the “international community.” And quite a number of otherwise-sensible, national security-minded folks have bought into the idea that chemical weapons use – and perhaps that of other weapons of mass destruction – will become more widespread on Assad’s part (and maybe others’) if we do not use force in response.

This must be seen for what it is: the entry-level drug for a principle long embraced by the far-left, one with very far-reaching and deleterious implications for U.S. sovereignty, interests and freedom of action in support of both.

It is bad enough that the Foreign Relations Committee’s draft authorization for the use of military force in Syria is, as a practical matter, a quite open-ended mandate for U.S. engagement in Syria’s civil war on the side of avowed enemies of this country.

If, in the process of adopting it, Congress also enshrines the notion that the United States is, henceforth, obliged to engage militarily in circumstances where bad things are being done to innocent civilians in violation of internationally accepted norms, one thing is clear: There will be no end to the demands for our intervention where we have no interest, no limit to claims on our defense assets in the service of some high-minded purpose and no doubt that we will, in the future, lack the military capabilities required for our own defense when, not if, they are needed.

Taken together, these attributes of the SFRC resolution make Lyndon Johnson’s Gulf of Tonkin blank-check pale by comparison, and require its rejection by the full Congress.





headline: Common Core and more -- why don't parents get to have a say in their kids' education?
byline: By Kristi Stone Hamrick


The unforgettable moment of parental bonding in the delivery room deceives many parents. After all, in today’s society, mothers and fathers are encouraged to be there for their children from first breath, cutting the umbilical cord, cheering at soccer matches, and helping in the doctor’s office, where many a queasy parent is asked to assist with something that can make a grown man go weak in the knees.

Most parents diligently work to raise up a generation of strong, confident, intelligent people, who know how to use the potty.

Which leaves many of us incredulous when it comes to the 1950s flashback – like expectant fathers in a hospital waiting room from an episode of “Mad Men” – that occurs when we start to engage in our children’s education, as “experts” in our modern day school system block us at the door to keep our parental cooties outside.

Why is it that when we start to engage in our children’s education, “experts” in our modern day school system block us at the door to keep our parental cooties outside?

Suddenly, parents should be seen and not heard, while we keep the checks coming.

My four children attend public schools in one of US News World Reports top 50 tiers, after living in the Washington, D.C. area with some of the best of private and public school in the nation. We’ve been exposed to what is said to be the best in the land in terms of schools.

Therefore it astounds me, and many parents I know, that in most conversations about how my own children's schools could improve, the overall response from those in charge is a patronizing pat on the head and assurances that “we’re from the government and we’re here to help you … now go away.”

With a “mine is better than yours” tone, educators too often flash their degrees (forgetting that many of us have a resume of our own).

Consider standardized testing today, which has been deified as the center of our educational system, no matter if children may need counseling later.

In my own childrens’ schools, huge signs are posted warning kids to "BE POSITIVE," "TAKE YOUR TIME," "REVIEW YOUR WORK"... as your future depends on it.

In response to complaints that too much class time was spent preparing for a test that only earns teacher bonuses and school dollars, our superintendent decided to incorporate this moment of time into kids’ overall grades.

So, now children in our school district, beginning in third grade can sit for the bar, as it were, to pass this colossal test to earn money for the nervous adults in the room.

God help them if they suffer from test anxiety.

This ignores the reality that a good teacher might help failing kids reach “C” level work, or that a bad teacher can browbeat kids or perhaps cheat to raise kids’ test scores for the cash. A better system would be to let parents vote on who deserves a bonus.

The new Common Core educational standards seem meager at best, perhaps because so much educational class time is dust in the wind as my children watch movies, presentations and create "discussion trees" while contemplating the evils of bullying, only to be sent home with hours of homework. 

But to call and ask about the time management of the classroom is to put your children in danger of retaliation by a blustering teacher who has essentially transferred the work of educating your child back to you.

In my children's school it seems crafts supersede contemplation. Book reports are rare, while my children create presentations of items collected that reminded them of books in a can or a box, through a costume, a poster or in a power point.

I’m afraid that this generation may not know that it is possible to write more words than can fit into a text.

Modern educators also seem held hostage to national standard of disputable value, ignoring real complexities – like differing opinions on WHY wars began or ended – to teach THE answer to life’s toughest questions for the test.

Some classes, like world history, require gray areas.

And then there is math, where my children have learned that if you get the right answer using your own methods you are wrong.

Really?

If you look at Facebook you can understand the battle so many parents find themselves in when it comes to teachers who need a different profession. A friend of mine excitedly posted that she had avoided all the dud teachers this year. Immediately a world of parents sent out a sympathetic “LIKE.”

Why is it that being bad at your job is not enough to get you fired as a teacher? While the rest of us must produce value for our employers – or else – being bad at your job with questionable moral judgment isn’t even a speed bump. But it’s the children who get run over.

It would be one thing if all this “expert” control meant better test scores and higher academic achievement.

It doesn’t.

To truly reform schools, empower parents who both pick up the tab for their local schools and pick up the pieces in their children’s lives when schools fail.



Kristi Stone Hamrick is a media consultant and active cupcake baker for all school functions. Follow her on Twitter@KristiSHamrick.



headline: Are you a 'believer in exile' -- I invite you to try God, again
byline: By Anne Graham Lotz


Have you tried God?

Did you used to go to church?

Why aren’t you going to church now?

Without implying you are a statistic, research indicates that 83% of all American adults consider themselves to be Christian, but the majority of them are unchurched.

Why?

The primary reason people avoid church, pollsters say, even though they consider themselves Christian, is because of wounds they have received within the family of faith.

Has that been your experience? Is that why you are hanging out on the periphery of God’s people?

I understand. I, too, have been driven from church fellowship by wounds that were inflicted on me by other church members.

The primary reason people avoid church, pollsters say, even though they consider themselves Christian, is because of wounds they have received within the family of faith. 

I have found myself living as a “believer in exile,” not running from God, but tired of putting up with those who call themselves by His name, yet behave in an ungodly manner.

Jesus understands, too. It never ceases to amaze me that the most vicious lies, the most violent attacks, the ultimate rejection of Jesus, came not from the Romans or the Greeks or the pagans or the secularists, but from Israelites who were considered, by themselves and others, the children of God. God’s people.

One primary reason I have not forsaken my own Christian faith is that I know Jesus “gets it.” He was literally wounded…crucified…by very religious people who considered themselves God’s representatives on earth, but were nothing of the sort. They were wicked, sinful pretenders.

So I refuse to let religious phonies destroy my heart for the One who loves me, who understands and feels my pain, and who draws close to me when I am wounded. I refuse to be robbed of life’s greatest treasure—a personal, permanent, passionate relationship with God through faith in Jesus, and the healing of wounds that He offers.

As painful and devastating as wounds inflicted by God’s people can be, they have made me more determined to authentically live out what I believe.

I am deeply motivated to know God. I want to know Him as He truly is, not through the distorted reflection of those who call themselves by His name. And I want to make Him known to others as accurately, winsomely, clearly, and compellingly as I can.

And God is knowable. He has declared that He is light. (1 John 1:5) Since one of the primary characteristics of light is that it makes itself visible, God is saying He has made Himself visible.

He can be clearly seen in the person of His Son, Jesus Christ. And He can be seen in the pages of the unique revelation of Himself, which we call the Bible.

If your focus in on the people of God, the Light can seem dim or even dark. So don’t look at them. Look at Him.

Try God…again.





headline: Asma and Bashar al-Assad -- a match made in hell
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Since their marriage in 2000, Asma al-Assad, stylish wife of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, has stood by his side through thick and thin. This, despite the fact that her husband Bashar presides over a government which Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch insist routinely tortures, imprisons and kills its political opponents.Most recently, of course, his government is accused of killing over a thousand Syrian men, women and children using chemical weapons.

Asma, who is pretty and fit, is also smart.She was an investment banker at J.P. Morgan when she met the Syrian president, who was then training in London to be an eye surgeon. 

Now, people around the world wonder how a woman born in the United Kingdom, with a bachelor’s degree in computer science and French literature, could have stood by as her husband amassed a fortune over $1 billion while serving in public office. And how she could post Instagram photographs of her charity work while presumably hearing that her husband’s regime has used chemical gas to asphyxiate children.

The answer is simple: Being pretty is no antidote to being greedy nor corrupt nor lacking empathy, even though people instinctively think it ought to be. 

Bashar and Asma are a match made in hell because they feed one another’s needs to keep reality at bay.  

Being smart and educated is no antidote to being an accomplice, to being an accessory to organized crime (whether as a mafia don’s wife or a dictator’s wife). 

And having children is no antidote to malignant narcissism.

You can be slim and wear stylish clothes and have an above-average IQ and still have such deep questions about whether you are worth anything at all, presumably because no one ever loved you for real. 

And then you can go about trying to fill yourself up with money, power and the adulation of others, no matter what it takes—including killing people. 

In fact, it is an expected result of running from one’s own self-loathing, cloaked in finery and fakery and fraud, that the real and decent people who interact with you will end up emptied out, of their money or their life force, by being in contact with you -- let alone having you as their “first lady.”

Bashar al-Assad may have turned out to be a decent eye surgeon if he had indulged the healer inside him, instead of being commandeered by his dictator father into dictatorship. 

And Asma al-Assad may have turned out to be a teacher of French literature had she not been raised in an environment that made her famished for finery and fame, such that she traded in her humanity for a palace, which only means she never grew up in anything like a home.

Bashar and Asma are a match made in hell because they feed one another’s needs to keep reality at bay. 

They are a dynamic duo of destruction because they were, at some point, for all intents and purposes, destroyed in their humanness.

Now they are in league to distance themselves from that reality, whatever it takes—even killing kids, which is only a stark physical representation of what must have happened to them, psychologically.

Add to this the fact that a large segment of the world community has endorsed their brand of tyranny to keep another malignancy at bay -- radical Islam -- and all the ingredients for chemical weapons were stirring in the cauldron for years. 

Because there’s one thing about monsters that is confounding: They are sometimes ruthless at tearing down other monsters. 

All marriages make psychological sense, even the ones that make for mass murder.





headline: Bono's right -- it's free enterprise, not food aid, that will lift Africa to prosperity
byline: By Brad Lips


On the stage of LiveAid in 1985, U2 broke through to a larger audience with an emotional performance of a song that declared, “I’m wide awake – I’m not sleeping.” It presaged decades of activism for the band’s charismatic frontman, Bono. 

The plight of Africans has long been at the center of his concerns, from early work to oppose South African Apartheid to more recent campaigns like ONE (advocating increased government aid to Africa).

Over the past year, it has become apparent that, while Bono is not changing his focus, he is singing a different tune. 

“Aid is just a stop-gap,” he said at Georgetown University, “Entrepreneurial capitalism takes more people out of poverty than aid…. In dealing with poverty here and around the world, welfare and foreign aid are a Band-Aid. Free enterprise is a cure.”

“Aid is just a stop-gap,” Bono said at Georgetown University. “Entrepreneurial capitalism takes more people out of poverty than aid."

In the same talk, he laughed and put his head in his hands, “Rock star preaches capitalism. Wow. Sometimes I hear myself and I just can’t believe it!”

It’s only tough to believe because most celebrities treat their philanthropy as a pose. Being identified with a good cause is more important than achieving real outcomes. 

By contrast, Bono has been visibly on a quest to actually improve the world. He has been willing to discuss his issues with people from all walks of life and all political perspectives, even when doing so brought bad P.R. 

Of course, some of the roads he’s walked down, were paved with good intentions, but led to dead ends. 

An idealist’s instinct is to believe we can rally behind a Big Solution. But the way the Big Solution is designed never mirrors how it is implemented. Delivering and administering aid invariably breeds corruption, or has unintended consequences upon the population being served. 

Think of how food aid can undermine local agriculture markets. Sometimes emergency relief efforts are essential, but food aid often has the effect of destroying the livelihoods of those farmers who have been investing in what could be a sustainable solution to their communities’ needs. 

That was the case during a drought in Ethiopia in 2003. Foreign aid programs brought in American corn instead of funding distribution of locally grown food that was actually in supply due to a strong harvest the previous year. 

The more well-funded the foreign aid bureaucracy in a given country, the more it distorts the labor market. Instead of becoming entrepreneurs and doctors – professions that solve real human needs – many of the best and brightest in African universities aspire, above all, for a cozy job within a well-funded bureaucracy. After all, that’s where the money is.

Aid programs that rely upon – and thereby empower – the administrative state tend to ossify democratic processes. Rulers like Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe have exploited the largess extracted from western donors to undermine political rivals and entrench themselves in power.

If Africa is to see improved living conditions in the coming decades, the energy must come from the bottom up. 

There are signs of hope. Some African countries, Rwanda most notably, have been climbing up the Economic Freedom of the World index while making a corresponding jump in economic growth (if not political rights). 

The distinguished Ghanaian economist George Ayittey speaks of an increasingly entrepreneurial attitude among the rising “Cheetah generation,” who take a pragmatic approach to improving their lot, in contrast with their elders who argued for state-led remedies to old, persistent problems. 

Just last month, Students for Liberty – a privately funded organization which has worked closely with my organization to expand its presence in Africa – held its first conference in Africa. 

More than 300 university-age Africans showed up to discuss how free-market policies can change Africa for the better, and how they can accelerate a pro-liberty youth movement in their countries. 

There are many reasons for optimism across the dark continent. 

A new one is surely that Bono is bringing his credibility to the message that it is free enterprise – not government largess – that will ultimately alight Africa with the glow of prosperity and progress.





headline: Could Obama sacrifice his ego to spare Americans from perils of a Syria strike?
byline: By Peter Johnson Jr.


Should you support a president no matter the cost to our country?

Ask a parent of a young American in basic training or at a service academy whether the code of duty, honor and country requires the spilling of real, red blood of their son or daughter for a president's blurry red line.

In the blink of a caucus, the shot across the bow strategy of a week ago has morphed into Syrian regime change by every other name. 

The halls of Congress have become closer to a Middle Eastern trading bazaar than we could imagine.

Trading bombs for votes and votes for bombs have become indivisible.

A president who couldn't stomach America as traffic agent for the world now sees America as the globe's robocop as reports say the attack will be bigger than first planned. 

The truth is that some Americans quietly pray that President Obama will choose to offer up his own shame and humiliation in the place of America's.

Today as he meets with world leaders -- not one of them who will join him in his mission -- he looks not in the mirror but points back to Congress, saying that only their credibility is on the line. Perhaps he’s hoping the world will forget that when he had the chance to act on his claimed constitutional authority to attack, and moral authority to be outraged, he chose indecision rather than leadership.

One congressional representative said Thursday that loyal Democrats would only vote for a military strike on Syria to save their standard bearer from shame and humiliation on the national stage.

All of us want our country to be seen as strong and nobly restoring the human rights of those who cannot help themselves. If pushed hard to the wall we will probably swallow our rationality and focus on the vile chemical massacre of innocents as reason enough for action.

If we do that then the shame and humiliation of a president will be avoided and his personal political disaster erased for the moment.

But, unfortunately every border in the Middle East is a redline ready to burst.

Our redline resolve is not to sacrifice Israel for Arab support.

The redline of Iranian nuclear weaponry beckons our response.

Now, the president has called out conduct for which he improvidently threatened a response.

The truth is that some Americans quietly pray that he will choose to offer up his own shame and humiliation in the place of America's.

In the end Americans will stand for America whatever decision is made. The errors of Iraq prove it. 

But we can only hope that a president who knows that Americans will sacrifice their lives to preserve his reputation decides to sacrifice just a little bit of his reputation to preserve the lives of Americans to fight another day. And if necessary to avenge the real red lines of a perilous Middle East. 

Let's think hard about whether the president's first mistake will be solved by the president's second and who will pay most dearly for it.





headline: Air Force cracking down on Christians
byline: By Todd Starnes


A 19-year Air Force veteran who was relieved of his duties because he disagreed with his openly gay commander over gay marriage is now facing a formal investigation after he told me his story.

Senior Master Sgt. Phillip Monk found himself at odds with his Lackland Air Force Base commander after he objected to her plans to severely punish an instructor who had expressed religious objections to homosexuality. During the conversation, his commander ordered him to share his personal views on homosexuality.

“I was relieved of my position because I don’t agree with my commander’s position on gay marriage,” he told me. “We’ve been told that if you publicly say that homosexuality is wrong, you are in violation of Air Force policy.”

In one of her first meetings with Monk, the commander expressed concern about the chaplain who would deliver the benediction at her promotion ceremony.

Steve Branson, pastor of Village Parkway Baptist Church, tells me that as many as a half dozen of his church members are currently facing persecution on the base for their religious beliefs.

“She said she wanted a chaplain but objected to one particular chaplain that she called a bigot because he preached that homosexuality is a sin,” Monk said.

After he was relieved of his duties, the Liberty Institute filed a religious discrimination complaint on his behalf.

Last week, Monk was supposed to meet with an Air Force investigator tasked with gathering facts about the complaint. But when he arrived, Monk was immediately read his Miranda Rights and accused of providing false statements in a conversation Monk had with me.

“I immediately got the sense that this was retaliation against me for coming forward with my religious discrimination complaint,” he said.

The accusations against Monk are a court-martial offense in the Air Force – and it’s quite possible that the 19-year veteran with a spotless record could be booted out of the military because of his Christian beliefs.

And he’s not the only Christian at Lackland Air Force Base facing persecution for opposing gay marriage, according to Monk’s pastor.

Steve Branson is the pastor of Village Parkway Baptist Church, about five miles from the Air Force base. He tells me that as many as a half dozen of his church members are currently facing persecution on the base for their religious beliefs.

“Sgt. Monk is just the tip of the iceberg,” the pastor tells me. “Anyone who doesn’t hold to the right view on homosexuality is having a very difficult time.”

Branson said one colonel is not even allowed to voice an opinion on the matter over fears it might cost him his job. Another airman has been brought up on charges eight times.

Christians are under attack, the pastor warned – and Lackland Air Force Base seems to be ground zero.

“I’m raising the warning,” the pastor said. “It’s not a good situation out here. The military’s job is not to fight these kinds of battles. Christians are having to walk so carefully. I hear it every Sunday at church.”

Hiram Sasser, of the Liberty Institute, is representing Monk in his battle with the Air Force. He said he’s very disturbed at what’s happening at Lackland.

“Lackland has been having some extensive problems,” Sasser told me. “It tells me there must be some sort of systemic problem in the Air Force. It’s leading to Christians not feeling welcome.”
Sasser said he was repulsed by the way the military has treated Monk.

“I can’t imagine someone having their Miranda Rights read to them like they did to Sgt. Monk simply because he is complaining about being mistreated and being discriminated against,” he said. “This kind of retaliation needs to come to a stop.”

Sasser said someone with such a clean military record deserves better treatment.

“We want to make sure we right all the wrongs and keep anyone from retaliating against Sgt. Monk,” he said.

Pastor Branson told me Monk is an outstanding member of the congregation.

“One of the finest men I’ve ever met in my life,” he said. “He lost his job because of what he thought. He’s paying the price.”

Monk tells me Christians are trading places with homosexuals.

“Christians have to go into the closet,” he said. “We are being robbed of our dignity and respect. We can’t be who we are.”

I asked Sgt. Monk why he just couldn’t keep quiet knowing that the Obama administration has staffed the Pentagon with anti-Christian civilians. Why risk getting booted out of the military?

Sgt. Monk told me he decided to take a stand for his three teenage sons.

“Every night after dinner we read the Bible together,” he said. “I tell the boys we’ve got a lot of stuff going on in this world and we need people to stand up. My boys know what I’m going through. They are looking at me – wanting to know how I’m going to handle this.”

He said the Monk family has a “family ethos.”

“The Monk family will be strong in mind, strong in soul, they will have strong character and strong work ethic,” he said. “That is the ethos of our family. That’s what I hope they see in me.”
He hopes his boys will see “a man who stands upright and stands for integrity.”

Sadly, those values are no longer seen as virtuous in a military that’s been turned into a social-engineering petri dish.





headline: Football vs. faith -- can you love football and still be a good Christian?
byline: By Pastor Rick McDaniel


Football season officially began this week. The most popular sport in America will once again headline sports pages, influence workplace conversations and impact family life. 

Many Americans love their football and many love their faith. 

For some, football is a religion, but for many more, football and their faith are perfect partners. 

Some of the most famous and successful NFL players are men of strong Christian faith. Players like Aaron Rodgers, Robert Griffith III, Adrian Peterson, Drew Brees, and of course, Tim Tebow, are all very devote Christians.

Are these two loves at odds? 

In the February 4, 2013 Sports Illustrated Super Bowl issue, Mark Oppenheimer wrote an article entitled, “In The Fields Of The Lord.” 

One of the essential message of the scriptures is that Jesus wants us to be servant oriented.  This is exactly what football teaches players.

His essential thesis was that for Christian players and coaches, football is bad.

Oppenheimer claims football will likely corrupt their Christian values, and thus all who love and follow football are corrupted as well. He argues the violence, physicality and adulation in playing football is “deeply at odds with Jesus’ message.” 

But this is simply not true.

First we must examine the message of Jesus. Oppenheimer says Jesus preferred the loser to the winner, the weak over the strong and the poor over the rich, but this is not an indictment against football. 

In fact, the essential message of these scriptures is that Jesus wants us to be servant oriented. This is exactly what football teaches players. A football team requires every player to put his personal agenda below the teams. He learns that unless each player fulfills his role on offense, defense and special teams, the entire team will suffer. Self-centeredness must give way to serving the team.

There is much in the Bible that supports the qualities needed for playing football. Many stories in the Bible tell of battles, of perseverance and of commitment. 

Romans 8:29 tells us God wants our character to be formed like Jesus, and football is a character building enterprise. 

Learning how to win and lose gracefully happens by playing football. 

Working hard toward a worthy goal and paying the price of self-sacrifice is learned playing football. 

Getting along with people who are different from you and appreciating their differences is learned playing football.

The concept of stewardship is paramount in the Bible. I Corinthians 4:2 tells us that we are stewards (managers) of all that God gives us, and we are to be faithful. 

Football players are given special gifts of size, speed and strength. 

They are given a huge platform of the most popular sport in America. 

When they faithfully use their gifts and excel at their sport, they are being good stewards of what God has given them. 

Oppenheimer says there are special temptations that football players face, but they are not exclusive to football. 

The temptation of materialism is simply a challenge many other Christ followers face. Business leaders, entertainers and other successful people have the same temptation to serve money instead of God, and it is not unique to NFL players and coaches. 

The massive list of men who have played the game and are faithful Christ followers is a testament to the fact that it can be done.

What is most disconcerting about Oppenheimer’s article is the shadow truth behind his thesis: Christian football players are not meek, nice and gentle. 

The problem is that for too long, many people have used Christianity to make men less manly. 

If you are a tough working guy, a high-achieving Alpha male or a fun-loving adventurer, you can’t be a real Christ follower according to some. 

This is why Sports Illustrated had the Super Bowl cover article proclaim that football and Christianity just don’t belong together. 

Moses, David, Daniel, Peter and Paul were all true leaders, and tough guys who got things done for God. Jesus’ bold leadership, blunt honesty and strong actions are what drew so many followers to Him. Jesus went into the temple and cleaned house, and that is no meek and mild man. 

How the Church and Christianity got to this place is a story too long to detail here. Suffice to say that this has created a situation where aggression, which is so natural to a man, is viewed with disdain. 

Football appeals to many men because it is aggressive, tough and filled with risk. 

Christianity appeals to me for exactly the same reasons. 

I want to be in the battle between good and evil; I want to fight for what is right, and I enjoy the challenge of doing it. 

The sport of football did not unmake me as a Christian; it made me a better one as it has done for hundreds of thousands of other men.





headline: Will the Russians be at the Center for American Progress with Samantha Power?
byline: By Richard Grenell


The left leaning NGO, Center for American Progress, has announced that U.N. Ambassador Samantha Power will be in Washington tomorrow to speak to them about Syria.

Will the Russians be there, too?

Why would Power leave New York and stop negotiating with the Russians on a U.N. Syria resolution at this crucial stage?

Why would Samantha Power leave U.N. headquarters in New York and stop negotiating with the Russians on a U.N. Syria resolution at this crucial stage?

Power has already skipped the emergency U.N. meeting on Syria after being on the job for only 19 days because she was on vacation in Ireland to attend the Charlie Chaplin Film Festival. 

Leaving New York and the U.N. at this critical phase in the negotiations process sends a terrible message to our friends and allies.

What Power is too naïve to realize is that speaking to liberal intellectuals in Washington instead of working the Russians is no way to get a resolution.

From my personal experience, the Russians always say they aren’t willing to support a U.S. priority.

The Russians told us that for years during the Bush administration – right before they voted five times for an Iran resolution they claimed to be against. 

Power is too new to understand the Russians' game. She needs to stay in New York and do her job. She also needs back up at the U.N. – and quick.





headline: War, war, what is it good for -- can America bomb and kill for bragging rights?
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


President Obama’s request for express congressional authorization for a limited aerial invasion of Syria raises profound legal and constitutional questions.

For starters, there is simply no legal basis in international law to support an American invasion of Syria. Yet, notwithstanding that, federal law permits the president to commit U.S. military forces anywhere he wants for up to 90 days, without express authorization from Congress.

So, why did Obama ask for the authorization he surely knows he already has?

Since March 2011, Syria has been in the throes of a civil war. Those seeking to oust the government of President Bashar al-Assad are a mixture of his domestic political opponents, disgruntled former Syrian military officers and dangerous radical foreign Islamist fighters affiliated with Al Qaeda. International organizations monitoring the war have put the dead from both sides at more than 100,000 persons.

Can President Obama lawfully bomb Syria to punish its government for violating international norms or to deter it from doing so again? In a word: No.

Until last week, the U.S. had steadfastly stayed out of this war, as its outcome is unlikely to affect American national security.

Though Assad is a former friend who once famously dined with then Sen. John Kerry, he is now a monster willing to go to extremes to stay in power.

On the other hand, our allies in the region surely would prefer that the Syrian government not be run by or under the influence of Al Qaeda, and federal law prohibits Americans and the U.S. government from aiding Al Qaeda.

Hence, our neutrality -- until Obama made a thoughtless and bravado-driven comment during his re-election campaign in August 2012, and now fears that his bluff has been called.

In his comment, the president, sounding like an international policeman -- a position he condemned when President George W. Bush sounded that way -- declared that if the Syrian government used chemical weapons against its adversaries, the very use of which is prohibited by all civilized norms, America would revisit its neutrality.

In reliance upon what he now claims is sound intelligence showing government use of chemical weapons on innocent Syrian civilians, Obama last week stated an intention to engage in a limited military invasion of Syria so as to weaken its resolve and ability to fight the rebels further.

Never mind that the photos shown by Obama’s folks of aid workers ministering to the supposed victims of government gassing show the workers without gas masks or gloves, and never mind that the Assad regime has permitted U.N. weapons inspectors unfettered access to its materiel, and never mind that the president wants to invade Syria before the weapons inspectors issue their report.

The president wants us to believe that the Assad regime intentionally gassed a thousand Syrian innocents who were of no military value to the rebels or threat to the regime -- and among whom were, according to former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, (D-Calif.), “hundreds of children.”

Even if all this took place as Obama claims, can he lawfully bomb Syria to punish its government for violating international norms or to deter it from doing so again? In a word: No.

International law recognizes only three lawful routes to the use of military force. It recognizes the right of every country to launch military force in order to prevent its own borders from being invaded or to subdue those who commenced an invasion.

It also recognizes the ability of any U.N. member state to come to the aid of any other U.N. member state when one of them has been invaded. And treaties to which the U.S. and Syria are parties permit limited purpose invasions when approved by the U.N. None of these lawful scenarios applies to Syria.

Can Obama just launch an invasion of Syria even if it would be unlawful and even if Congress says no?

Because of the vicissitudes of history, the personalities of presidents and the myopic compromises of past Congresses, the area of presidential war-making has different legal and constitutional ramifications. Under the Constitution, only Congress can authorize the offensive use of military force. James Madison's notes from the Constitutional Convention in 1787 make it obvious that the Framers were nearly unanimous in their resolve to keep the war-making power away from the president and repose it exclusively with Congress. They did this clearly and unambiguously in Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution.

Notwithstanding the precise language of the Constitution and the history of the nation's birth, the War Powers Resolution (WPR), a federal statute enacted in 1973 over President Nixon's veto, does permit the president on his own to use the military for offensive wars for a maximum of 90 days.

Thus, under current federal law, Obama may lawfully bomb Syria even if Congress declines to authorize him to do so and even though such an act would violate international law.

But the WPR is profoundly unconstitutional because it cedes Congress’ constitutional war-making power to the president.

The WPR was an ill-conceived political compromise effectuated by a Watergate-weakened president, congressional hawks who approved of Nixon’s unilateral invasion of Cambodia and sober congressional heads more faithful to the separation of powers.

Yet, the Supreme Court has ruled consistently that the transfer of constitutional powers among the branches of the federal government is unconstitutional, even if popular and consensual, unless brought about by an amendment to the Constitution.

Thus, Congress can no more let the president start wars than the president can let Congress appoint federal judges, lest the Constitution have no meaning or force of law.

So why does Obama want Congress’ approval to do that which international law prohibits and federal law permits?

Obama knows that war is the health of the state: It unites political adversaries around common patriotic-sounding goals and often generates support for those in harm’s way and resources for the government officials who sent them there.

But, will another war enhance our freedoms or our safety? Will it add to our debt? Will it trash the law? Can we bomb and kill for bragging rights?

The answers are obvious, and they don’t justify war.





headline: Obama's Syria leadership no profile in courage
byline: By Michael Goodwin


The spectacle in Congress yesterday was both edifying and terrifying. Convincing explanations for why America must take the lead in a military strike against Syria provided clear reminders that ours is the one indispensable nation. Unless America stands up to genocidal maniacs, the world will go dark.

At the same time, the reluctance to assume that responsibility is disturbing. It starts with President Obama, whose chronic ambivalence about American leadership emboldens tyrants.

His loss of nerve at the 11th hour was a shameful abdication, and his punting the Syria problem to Congress was a political ploy designed to free him of responsibility. No profile in courage there.

Many members of Congress also seem skeptical, asking, as one put it, “Why us?” Those questions reflect public opinion, which is largely against intervention.

Obama's decision to punt the Syria problem to Congress was a political ploy designed to free him of responsibility.

Secretary of State John Kerry was, once again, forceful in outlining the stakes. As he said in his testimony, giving Bashar al-Assad immunity for using chemical weapons would give opportunity for others to do the same, or worse.

“Iran is hoping you look the other way,” he said. “Hezbollah is hoping isolationism will prevail. North Korea . . . they’re all hoping for silence.”

There could be a silver lining. The momentum for support is based on a stronger strike than the mere “shot across the bow” Obama initially planned. The idea of smashing Syrian airports, planes and helicopters and the military infrastructure would do more than just warn Assad. It could stop the slaughter.

But time is the enemy, too. Assad is moving weaponry to civilian areas, using his own people as human shields. That’s his nature. Hopefully, his days are numbered.





headline: Thanks to Putin, US strike won't cripple Syria's Assad for long
byline: By Van Hipp


One of the reasons the states came together to form the federal government was to provide for the “common defense” of the American people. 

In keeping with this, the so-called "Reagan Test" has been the best guide as to when U.S. military action is wise -- that is when a vital U.S. national security interest at stake. Once committing to military action, our mission must be clearly defined and we must have an end game.

Let’s look at Syria.The atrocities of the Assad regime are horrific. A friendly Syria, without Assad, would be great news for the free world. It could also help weaken Iran. 

Unfortunately, a number of the members of the loose band of Assad opposition groups have strong ties to Al Qaeda, and one in fact—the Al-Nusra Front—has been designated by both the United States and the United Nations as a terrorist organization.

If you consider the “Putin Factor,” the ability of Syria to reconstitute itself militarily and possibility of an Al Qaeda-linked group acquiring chemical weapons, military action doesn’t make sense.

Further, President Obama now says that any possible military action is not about regime change. 

So what is the purpose militarily and where is the vital U.S. national security interest?

As the situation stands now, the only vital U.S. national security interest concerns Syria’s five major chemical weapons sites and the storage facility at Cerin, which handles the Syrian Biological Weapons Program. We must take whatever action necessary to insure that none of this falls into the hands of any opposition groups with Al Qaeda ties.

By almost all accounts, the U.S. is looking at a very short “surgical strike” by firing about 200 cruise missiles from ships and submarines at a cost of roughly $350 million.

We can’t take out the chemical facilities under such a scenario for fears of creating plumes of deadly vapors, so the U.S. will try and target “command and control” sites and systems capable of delivering chemical and biological weapons. 

But then what? 

Syria, which is the largest importer of Russian arms in the Middle East, will be able to reconstitute itself quickly in terms of weaponry thanks to its relationship with the old KGB agent, Vladimir Putin. 

Further, such a short-term exercise for show, with no real impact, could actually have disastrous consequences. It might indirectly help radical Islamic groups gain power and increase the possibility of one or more of the chemical weapons facilities falling into the hands of an Al Qaeda-linked organization. 

Recently, Russia’s deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin said that “The West is playing with the Islamic world like a monkey with a grenade.”

The United States has cut its Defense budget drastically in recent years, while Russia’s is expected to increase 59% by 2015. 

As U.S. Senator Jim Inhofe, the ranking member of the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee said last week, “No red line should have been drawn without the strategy and funding to support it.” 

Recently, retired General Colin Powell also cautioned against military intervention in Syria.

Syria’s ability to reconstitute itself militarily and acquire new military technology from Putin, after a short-term U.S. Military exercise for show, is real. 

Let’s look at the facts.

-- In 2005, Russia forgave 75% of Syria’s debt for military purchases (about $9 billion) in order to be able to sell new weapons to Syria.

-- Last year, military arms contracts between Russia and Syria were $4.3 billion.

-- Russia has a Naval Support Base in Syria at Tartus, which it has expanded since 2009 and the channel has been dredged to allow larger Russian ships to enter. Currently, it can support up to 10 guided-missile cruisers, submarines and aircraft carriers.

-- There are reports that earlier this summer, Putin supplied the Assad regime with new, state of the art rocket launchers and Skean 5 ground-to-sea missiles, capable of reaching targets 250 km off of Syria’s coast.

-- Russia has delivered to Syria its most advanced anti-ship missile, the P-800 Yakhont super-sonic anti-ship cruise missile.

--Within the last week, Russia has deployed 2 warships to the east Mediterranean (a missile cruiser and a large anti-submarine ship). On Sunday, Russia dispatched the reconnaissance ship Priazovye to the Syrian coast.

-- Russia has signed a contract to provide Syria its top of the line S-300 Air Defense Missile System, capable of shooting down aircraft and cruise missiles from 5 to 200 kilometers. Syria says the missiles began arriving this May, while Russia says the delivery is not finished. Recently, Putin renewed veiled threats to supply the system to Iran.

When you consider the “Putin Factor” and the ability of Syria to reconstitute itself militarily, together with potentially increasing the possibility of an Al Qaeda linked group acquiring chemical weapons, military action, as currently envisioned, doesn’t make sense.

Most importantly, where is the vital U.S. national security interest? And what is the end game?

What does make sense would be for the U.S. to develop a real foreign policy. These are dangerous times and the stakes are high. Unfortunately, today America lacks a clear and defined foreign policy—a real plan—and we continually send all the wrong signals.





headline: As Syria vote looms, love affair rekindled between Obama and liberal media
byline: By Erick Erickson


That did not take long. Less than a year ago, the Washington press corps looked likely to divorce Barack Obama. He had rocked their relationship with the Department of Justice probing Fox News’ James Rosen, the Associated Press, and others. But like Gollum and the precious, the Washington press corps has found separation too hard.

Syria has reconciled the president and his court. With his decision to ask Congress to debate action in Syrian, the press corps is back to defending their precious.

“Quite extraordinary: after 30 years of presidents strengthening powers of exec branch, POTUS is giving some of that power back to Congress,” tweeted Chuck Todd of NBC.

Laura Rozen,who writes the Back Channel news-blog for Al-Monitor, tweeted, “My jaw has been more or less hanging open for an hour.” She followed that up with “My neighbor just came out to discuss her shock but I am too shocked to discuss it." 

The press is in full “Defend the Precious” mode now.  The divorce is off.  The love affair has been rekindled.

"Marc Ambinder of GQ tweeted, “Wow. Obama just pulled the loose string from that Gordian knot of the imperial presidency.”

Shortly after Republican media consultant Rick Wilson accurately tweeted, “A few seconds after his speech, I predicted a liberal and media squeeze-fest over this shenanigan. And I'm right,” Marc Ambinder shot back, “but Rick — maybe once — just this once — it’s deserved.”

Perhaps the most high brow and hagiographic tweet of all came from the New York Times’ and CNBC’s John Harwood, who wrote, “Obama just changed historic trajectory of executive-legislative relations on war powers” and followed it up with “Obama said at March on Washington commemoration that arc of history doesn't bend on its own. He has bent it on WH war power.”

The press is in full “Defend the Precious” mode now. The divorce is off. The love affair rekindled by the president’s scapegoating Congress via procedural machinations. 

He changed his mind on a forty-five minute walk with his chief of staff, USA Today would have you know. 

The president surprised his national security team. John Kerry, having just Friday lifted his face to the camera to suggest action was imminent, got thrown under the bus except, the Washington press corps will have you know, he fully supports the decision.

Thus the press corps, bored from a rather mundane August where they have done their best to ignore Senators Mike Lee and Ted Cruz except to bash them, returns to Washington in September all atwitter, literally, for their man Barry.

George W. Bush, getting congressional approval for military operations seven days after the September 11th attack was not bending the arc of history, but John Harwood will probably spend the next week of reporting telling us all exactly how arc bending Barack Obama is.

What’s really going on is Barack Obama needs Congress to save him from himself. The British were supposed to join us in our Syrian adventure.British and American warships moved into position. All David Cameron needed to do was get his Parliament on board. That did not turn out the way everyone expected.

Barack Obama was perfectly happy to go it alone.

John Kerry made it clear. 

Senior White House aides made it clear. But after talking with his chief of staff — the Washington press corps has failed to even consider political calculations in all of this — Barack Obama decided to punt it all to Congress. 

Considering how rapidly the Washington press corps gravitated to “historic” and “arc bending” rhetoric, it is likely the president’s forty-five minute walk included a lot of talking points created to rekindle the romance with the press.

The original strategy laid out by Barack Obama had been questioned by some of the people who originally designed the plan. 

Pro-war Senators like John McCain were questioning the wisdom of sending in a few cruise missiles without much else. 

Most of Washington buzzed that the planning thus far has been erratic and amateurish. 

The president’s plan seemed, at best, a strategy of being only a little bit pregnant in Syria. No one really knew what the president wanted to do other than fire some missiles.

Frederic Hof, a fellow at the Atlantic Council and the former Syria point person for the Obama State Department, told BuzzFeed over the weekend, “The results of this mystifying lack of preparedness have been abysmal.”

Without Britain on board, the United States would go it alone without any idea what exactly it would accomplish. 

The public, sensing the Keystone Kops approach toward Syria, moved decisively against bombing. 

The president, having pounded his chest in the name of executive power, now without Britain, needed to extricate himself from the situation. Passing the buck to Congress was the solution. Again, in its rush to defend the precious, it is staggering how so much of the press has ignored the political calculus of using Congress as a scapegoat.

This is not a bold move.

This is not an arc bending move. 

This is not a move that should leave no one’s jaw dropped except by how quickly the Washington press corps has rallied to President Obama’s side. 

The president is asking Congress to debate whether or not to bomb Syria on behalf of Al Qaeda aligned rebels and telling anyone who will listen he might just ignore Congress should it reject the bombing.

The only sad part of this whole affair is that Barack Obama’s new found skills at extricating himself from bad situations in the Middle East came too late to deploy for others in Benghazi.





headline: Jobs numbers reflect another bleak month for American workers
byline: By John Lott


Friday’s new job numbers show something workers already knew: they face a very bleak job market. Unfortunately, Americans have been facing tough times for many years now. According to the latest Gallup poll, Obama’s job approval rating on the economy stands at just 35 percent.

After over four years, this continues to be, by far, the worst recovery on record. And that goes for income as well as for job growth.

Too often the media’s gauge of whether the economy is improving rests solely on the number of jobs created or the unemployment rate. And indeed, 169,000 jobs were added in August, but what is rarely mentioned is that at the same time 204,000 more working age people were added to the workforce.

Ninety-six percent of the net jobs added this year have been part-time jobs.

True, the unemployment rate has also fallen from its peak of 10 percent down to 7.3 percent. But that doesn't mean many new jobs. People are classified as unemployed only as long as they are actively looking for work. The unemployment rate can thus fall either because people have found jobs or because they have given up looking for work.

During the recovery, 70 percent of the drop was due to people giving up looking.

New jobs are simply not being created fast enough. Jobs have increased by 2.9 percent in the more than four years since the recovery started, but that is less than a third the job growth seen in the average recovery since 1970, and even less than a fourth the growth following other severe recessions.

And it has not been even close to keeping up with the growth in the working-age population, and the percentage of the population working has quickly fallen to a level we haven't seen since the 1970s. This number slid even further in August.

A closer look shows the picture is actually even bleaker:

Stunningly, 96 percent of the net jobs added this year have been part-time jobs.

Thus many are stuck with part-time jobs when they really are looking for full-time work.

There is also another problem. Over the year and a half before the recession, new hires averaged 5.25 million per month. During the recession (December 2007 to June 2009), new hires fell dramatically to 4.39 million, hitting 4.2 million per month in January 2009, when Obama became president.

But instead of hiring picking up as it normally would in a recovery, it has averaged just 4.1 million per month.

The latest data, for the last three months, have shown some improvement to 4.35 million -- but the number is still slightly below the average during the recession.

So how can we be gaining jobs when fewer new people are being hired? Many are simply staying in the jobs they already have.

A drop in total job separations can be a good thing -- if, for example, the cause is a decline in layoffs. But that's not the case. Rather, there's been a serious drop in workers quitting -- most likely because they fear not being able to get a new job.

One million fewer Americans a month are quitting than during the couple of years before the recession.

Quits aren't supposed to be falling during a recovery. During a recession, sure: With poor prospects of landing a good new job quickly, people hesitate to voluntarily leave.

Yet, the opposite is supposed to happen in a recovery: People sense opportunity, and they chase it. The rebound is supposed to be especially strong after longer recessions, as people who've been putting off quitting finally decide it's safe to bite the bullet.

While those who have jobs have hunkered down and held on to their jobs, the lack of new jobs has really hit young people who are entering the workforce. Obviously, they don't have the option to simply keep the jobs they already have.

If economic research is right, there are long-run consequences to a bad start in the job market. These young people's entire careers are going to be impacted by this early unemployment.

Other developed countries, such as Canada and even the European Union, have created jobs at a faster rate than America. And the countries in Europe that have most restrained government spending and borrowing (Germany, Sweden, Hungary, and Switzerland) have done by far the best.

The president keeps speaking as if he has no responsibility for what is happening. But for the first two years of his administration, he enjoyed massive super-majorities in Congress and got everything that he wanted passed, including five very expensive "jobs" bills.

We didn’t even start adding net jobs during the “recovery” until after the stimulus had run out of money to spend. The resources the government spends had to come out of someone else’s pocket.

ObamaCare has also created its problems. The media has been filled with stories of firms turning full-time workers into part-time ones in order to avoid ObamaCare penalties.

Americans have been extremely patient with President Obama’s policies. But recent surveys show that even most Democrats don't believe Obama is offering new ideas to finally get the economy going. Hopefully, the president will learn that his economic policies are failing before another Labor Day goes by.





headline: We cannot strike Syria with the best of intentions and no long-term strategy
byline: By Pete Hoekstra


When I came to Congress in 1993 the traditional idea that all politics stopped at the water’s edge was alive and well. Americans had been unified for the previous four decades against the threat from the former Soviet Union and communism.

Sure, there were times when there were major disagreements about tactics, but questions about whether the threat was real were largely nonexistent.

Americans were united in the belief that we could meet and defeat the enemy. That unity led to the collapse of the Berlin Wall and the Soviet Union, which was clearly an American victory.

Americans must step back and realize that an effective foreign policy is very difficult to devise, and we must present a united front to make it work.

After 9/11America had that same sense of unity. I will never forget standing with fellow members of Congress on the steps of the Capitol to sing “God Bless America” on the night of 9/11.

America had just experienced a modern day Pearl Harbor and we were prepared to stand together to defeat the new aggressor. That unity led to bipartisan support for action in Afghanistan and Iraq, new NSA "spying" programs, enhanced interrogations, black sites, Gitmo, and drone strikes.

Together Republicans and Democrats made difficult decisions deemed necessary to confront, contain, and defeat the enemy, radical Islam.

But that sense of unity was short lived.

Why did partisanship disrupt our foreign policy unity? Was it due to political opportunism or genuine policy differences?

We may never know.

The bottom line is that America became bitterly divided. Early strategies and bipartisan agreements were called into question.

Confusion about our military goals developed.Who was the real enemy and why was the United States at war in Iraq?

Questions were raised about the NSA, interrogations, Gitmo, and drone strikes. Many would argue that the fatigue and anger associated with the Iraq war led to the Democrat takeover of the House in 2006 and the election of President Obama in 2008. Suddenly politics had marched past the water’s edge all the way to the Middle East and Afghanistan.

That type of destructive partisanship has continued since the Iraq war and has hurt American credibility abroad.

Our indecisive approach to the situation in Syria is a good example of how our differences are crippling us. An American president feels paralyzed to act due to deep divisions between the parties and deep public skepticism about more foreign intervention.

Americans must step back and realize that an effective foreign policy is very difficult to devise, and we must present a united front to make it work. There will always be successes and spectacular failures.If those successes and failures are constantly used as ammunition for partisan politics, there will be political winners and losers, but America as a whole will be the biggest loser.

Republicans and Democrats should be able to agree on four observations:

1. The threat from radical Islam continues.

2. Many of the tools necessary to fight this threat have been embraced by a Republican and Democrat president.

3. The United States has not made significant progress in defeating the threat since 2001.

4. America is deeply divided as to the way forward.

There is a need for vigorous debate and discussion before we commit ourselves to further military action.

There are serious questions that must be answered:

- What is the objective?

- What are the broader implications?

- What is the larger strategy to defeat radical Islam?

- What is the strategy to bring stability and security to the Middle East?

- What policies will be implemented to stop Iran's march toward possession of nuclear weapons?

Let’s not add Syria to the list of American misadventures in the Middle East where we went in with the best of intentions but no sustainable long term strategy.

Now is the opportunity to discuss and formulate that long term plan. The president has asked for help. Leaders on both sides of the aisle should help develop a coherent, and sustainable strategy, then present a united front to the world as we move forward together to face the challenge.

Demanding a coherent foreign policy before we act in Syria is not a "new era of "new isolationism." Demanding an end to partisan bickering on foreign policy is not an unrealistic requirement.

These are just common sense expectations of a frustrated and angry American public.

They have heard the same arguments repeated over and over by politicians and others only to see disappointing results.

These are ingredients which they believe are essential to win this war. These are characteristics of leadership that have been absent for far too long!





headline: The suspicious science behind 'happiness' surveys
byline: By Iain Murray


Columbia University Professor Jeffrey Sachs, perhaps the world’s leading “sustainability” guru, has a favorite country when talking about progress: the tiny mountain Kingdom of Bhutan.

As he points out, “Forty years ago, Bhutan’s fourth king, young and newly installed, made a remarkable choice: Bhutan should pursue ‘gross national happiness’ (GNH) rather than gross national product.”

Yet this is the same king who presided over what was essentially a medieval theocracy until his abdication in 2008.

If that seems at odds with the idea of the nation pursuing “happiness,” it should. There are all sorts of problems with attempts to formalize the pursuit of happiness as if it were a science.

Individuals know how to augment their own happiness better than any public officials acting on their behalf.

The central question in making happiness the focus of government decision-making is: How do you measure it? Proponents of happiness research have developed metrics and indices which they say are firmly grounded in the scientific method. When you lift the stone, however, all sorts of unpleasantness are revealed. These measures are essentially subjective.

In a new study from the Competitive Enterprise Institute, “What is the Happiness Lobby? Growing Body of Questionable Research Lends Support to Paternalistic Policies,” Blake Taylor and I take a stick and prod around in these metrics. What we find isn’t pretty.


The first measure in assessing happiness is obtained by asking people how happy they are. Yet the questions that are commonly asked in such surveys are vague and unscientific, like:

The answers to these questions cannot be empirically tested or verified. They are subject to all sorts of vagaries up to and including what mood the person being questioned is in.

Moreover, in an attempt to quantify the responses, they are normally coded on a scale from one to ten or even from one to three.

An obvious problem presents itself: What happens to respondents who say they are “very happy,” thus receiving the top mark on the scale, but then their situation improves?

The indices, quite simply, have a built-in bias against measuring improvements in people’s condition. A person at the top of the scale who feels worse when asked a question for a second time will drive his ranking down, but one who feels happier will have no effect.

Yet these dubious measures aren’t the only ones included in happiness indices. Other measures judged by the researchers to affect quality of life go into the mix, yet the selection of those measures is subjective by itself.

For instance, the OECD Better Life Index contains two measures of the effects of crime: the homicide rate and the assault rate.

Measuring the assault rate depends on accurate reporting of such crimes (which may be inadequate in countries with ineffective or corrupt police forces), and is therefore problematic in itself.

However, the category is obviously incomplete as there is no measure of property crime. Someone who has his or her meager belongings stolen regularly is unlikely to be happy, even when subjected to no other crimes.

Even if these measures were meaningful, it is difficult to see how they can helpfully inform public policy.

Presumably, they could be used to promote some activities and restrict or prohibit others on the basis of whether they seem to increase or decrease happiness. This, however, runs slap bang into what Nobel Prize winning economist Friederich Hayek called “the knowledge problem.” Individuals know how to augment their own happiness better than any public officials acting on their behalf.

Finally, these indices, which normally show that the Western world has not become happier since the 1940s, plainly miss something. Not only are we healthier and wealthier and more educated, but our society has changed fundamentally for the better in a lot of ways.

American society has improved leaps and bounds in terms of extending rights and freedoms to previously disenfranchised citizens. None of this is reflected in the measures that happiness researchers like to cite.

The people of Bhutan have recognized this as well.

In the first peaceful transition of power under the new democracy there, a government was elected that declares itself “happiness skeptical.”

The new Prime Minister Tshering Togbay, facing crippling debt levels, recently said that, "If the government of the day were to spend a disproportionate amount of time talking about GNH rather than delivering basic services, then it is a distraction."

Looks like we can learn something from Bhutan, after all.





headline: Why should any dictator or terrorist fear America?
byline: By Cal Thomas


Appearing in the White House Rose Garden last Saturday, President Obama apparently experienced a revelation. He acknowledged there are constitutional limits on his power, something he has heretofore mostly ignored while issuing executive orders, bypassing Congress on appointments and deciding which parts of the Affordable Care Act to follow and which to delay or ignore.

The president will wait for Congress to reconvene on Sept. 9 and debate whether to grant him authority to attack Syria. It is uncertain whether he will get approval for what he says will be a limited — and likely inconsequential — strike.

His indecisiveness sends a clear message to the Middle East where dictators and mullahs respect power and consistency. They can be expected to have little fear of this president who thinks his order to Navy Seals to kill Usama bin Laden should be sufficient proof of his strength and resolve.

The world is again witnessing the peril of on-the-job training. Apparently Jimmy Carter’s ineptitude taught us nothing.

The trouble with an uncertain trumpet blown by a naive and weak leader is that it can get people killed. American people.

Why should any dictator or terrorist fear America? The president promised to bring to justice those who attacked the U.S. mission in Benghazi nearly a year ago, killing four Americans. He hasn’t. With Syria, he has sent a message that will almost certainly invite more attacks on Americans.

You know things are bad when Russian President Vladimir Putin sounds more decisive and more credible than the American president.

The day after Secretary of State John Kerry (who looked and sounded more presidential than the president) delivered a ringing justification for attacking Syria, the president undercut him by passing the buck to Congress.

Obama should have immediately recalled Congress, as British Prime Minister David Cameron reconvened Parliament. After a serious debate, a majority of MPs rejected any British military role in attacking Syria. Opposition came from all sides. Maybe that’s what the president fears and why he wants time to lobby members of Congress before a vote.

What will the president do if Congress refuses to go along, as it well may? If Congress won’t authorize military force against Syria, the president will suffer a double blow from which he may not recover.

Will he attack anyway and risk backlash from a public exhausted by war, or will he suspend attack plans and look emasculated as Damascus and others are already claiming he is?

Either way, he and America lose.

In view of the president’s disastrous foreign-policy performance, it is surreal to read the citation for his 2009 Nobel Peace Prize, which in a rare moment of humility he admitted was undeserved given his short time in office.

The citation said in part: “Obama has as president created a new climate in international politics. Multilateral diplomacy has regained a central position, with emphasis on the role that the United Nations and other international institutions can play. Dialogue and negotiations are preferred as instruments for resolving even the most difficult international conflicts…”

The Nobel committee may want to consider asking the president to return the prize.

Hillary Clinton was right when she said during her run for president in 2008 that Barack Obama lacked foreign-policy experience. Her claim resulted in a campaign commercial about which of them could better be trusted to take a 3 a.m. call to the White House.

As Foreign Policy Magazine recalls, “[Bill] Clinton also attacked Obama’s lack of experience in interviews with Al Hunt and Charlie Rose in the final months of 2007, arguing that Obama was ill-equipped to handle foreign-policy issues like terrorism and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.”

The world is again witnessing the peril of on-the-job training. Apparently Jimmy Carter’s ineptitude taught us nothing.

The late William James said, “There is no more miserable human being than one in whom nothing is habitual but indecision.”

Unless it’s the United States.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Mr. Obama, you've already lost the Syrian War -- here's how to win the big one
byline: By K.T. McFarland


President Obama – face it, you’ve already lost the Syrian war. You probably lost it a year ago when you laid down that "red line" threat without any idea how you respond if Assad called your bluff. 

As any parent knows, if you make a threat, you better be ready to carry it out. If you tell your teenager, “Be home before dark or I’ll ground you,” and then if he isn’t and you don’t, you can bet he will stay out ‘til midnight next time, and before long he’ll be sneaking out in the middle of the night.

No matter how you try to wiggle out of it, you're the one who set the "red line" -- not the world, not Congress, not the American people.

By tossing the Syrian decision to Congress, you guaranteed that you’ve lost the Syrian war. The American people are overwhelming against another Middle East war, and the more your administration tries to sell it, the more public support falls off. 

Mr. Obama, should pledge America to becoming energy independent by the end of your Presidency, and a major oil and natural gas exporter by the end of the decade.

Secretaries Kerry and Hagel team did lay out why it’s important to attack Syria --because Assad used chemical weapons to slaughter innocent civilians, women and children.

They also laid out what you want to accomplish by attacking Syria – punishing Assad, deterring his further use of chemical weapons and reinforcing American’s credibility.

But what Kerry Co. failed to explain is how a limited attack against Syria will accomplish those goals. And they certainly failed to say what funds are available to pay for it in light of your reduced defense budgets.

By taking the fight to Congress instead of to Syria, you’ve left legislators to fight amongst themselves over the details of an American response. Even if they reach agreement and vote in favor of an attack, it’s likely to be too little and too late to make a difference. 

Assad will have had plenty of time to move mobile military assets to hospital parking lots and school playgrounds, so the only choice you’ll have is between lobbing a few missiles into the Syrian desert, or killing innocent civilians in population centers.

If Assad calls your bluff and launches another chemical attack in response or widens the war, you’ll be faced with either backing off or escalating the Syrian war, just like LBJ did with Vietnam. 

If you do escalate, and topple Assad, you’ll pave the way for Al Qaeda-affiliated rebels to take his place. If Congress does not approve your attack plan, you will look even more ineffective. 

Either way, those chemical weapons will remain --for Assad or the Al Qaeda rebels to use --- since no one thinks they can be sabotaged, destroyed, or captured without boots on the ground. And no one is voting for boots on the ground.

Face it, President Obama. You’ve been outmaneuvered on Syria, and have no good options left. As bad as it would be to do nothing, doing something that fails would be even worse. 

Better to focus on winning the bigger war.Stop thinking tactically, and start thinking strategically. 

Syria may loom large today, just like Iraq, Libya and Egypt have before. But the Middle East wars will not stop with Syria, they are likely to spread throughout the region as oil-fueled Sunnis battle oil-fueled Shiites in country after country for years to come.

The single best thing you could do to improve America’s position in the Middle East is what President Kennedy did when the Russians shocked the world by being the first country to send a man into space. In response, Kennedy pledged to land a man on the moon within a decade. 

You should pledge America to becoming energy independent by the end of your presidency, and a major oil and natural gas exporter by the end of the decade.

Approve the Keystone Pipeline. Unshackle American energy companies and allow them to develop U.S. resources. American energy independence would mean we no longer need to curry favor with one side or another in the perennial Middle East conflicts. 

Becoming the Arab oil countries’ biggest competitor means they will be forced to worry about how they are going to meet their own domestic payrolls. They will have neither time nor money left over to pay for terrorists or proxy wars.

One of the Middle East’s savviest investors, Prince Alwaleed bin Talal, warned his Saudi brethren their revenues will plummet if the U.S. develops shale oil and gas.

Iran’s oil revenues have fallen significantly and their financial support for terrorist Hamas has dwindled as a result. Let that be the new normal in the Middle East.

That’s how, Mr. President, you can win the war. Develop America’s energy resources. It will send shivers up the spines of the Arab oil states who are paying for both sides of the Syrian war, and bankrolling Hezbollah and Al Qaeda and other like-minded groups.

And while you're in Russia for the G20 meeting, have a little heart-to-heart with President Putin. Explain to him that the Russian economy may be riding high now, but it will collapse in a few short years without foreign investment and American technology to develop new oil and natural gas fields and infrastructure projects. 

Give Putin the choice -- the US and Russia can either bury the hatchet and work together to solve Iran, Syria, Islamic jihad, and the other international issues on which we disagree, or we can continue to spar over those issues. 

If Russia wants to work with us, we'll work with them on energy projects. If not, they might continue to humiliate us, but we'll help bankrupt them.

Then remind Putin that the reason the Soviet Union collapsed and Reagan won the Cold War was because he maneuvered events so the price of oil fell from $40 to $18 dollars a barrel in nine months, thus causing Russian economy to collapse. 

We are happy to do it again. 

Despite Putin's efforts in recent years to diversify their economy, the world still doesn't want Russian cars or computers. Russia remains a petro-state: one third of the country's GNP and half their budget comes from energy exports. 

If you do this, President Obama, you will send a clear message to President Putin: Stop trying to wrestle bears and ride shirtless in the Siberian wilderness, and start worrying about how you are going to pay Russia’s bills when your oil and gas reserves run out in a few years time. 

And then invite him to get in touch -- sooner rather than later.





headline: Let's yank politicians off the boondoggle train and put them on a private bus
byline: By John Stossel


When Democrats and Republicans agree, I get nervous. It often means that they agree to grab my wallet.

Both parties now agree that we don't have extra budget money lying around, but both say government does need to spend more on "infrastructure."

Even conservatives -- such as my Fox colleague Mike Huckabee and Manhattan Institute scholar Nicole Gelinas -- want more spent on roads and mass transit.

Privately owned buses, are now the fastest growing mass transit in America.

The reason, advocates claim, is that infrastructure, unlike most government spending, has a "multiplier effect" -- it creates new wealth by doing things like speeding up travel.

Well, it might.

Advocates also point out something that seems obvious to them: Infrastructure is a job that must be done by government. Who else would launch big projects like the New York City subway system? Subways are what Big Government supporters call a "public good."

They are important to many people, but there's no way that business would build subways or run them, they argue. Subways lose billions of dollars. Entrepreneurs would never invest in subway cars or dig subway tunnels -- there's no profit in that.

But often what we "obviously know" ... is not so.

Most of New York's subways were actually built by private companies. Few New Yorkers even know that. Private companies dug the first tunnels and ran the trains for about 40 years. But when they wanted to raise the fare to a dime, the politicians said they had to "protect" the public. Government took over the system, saying only "public ownership" could guarantee affordable fares.

But government doesn't do anything well. Under government management, profit disappeared and the fare rose well beyond the inflation-adjusted equivalent of what the private companies had wanted to charge.

Now, politicians want you to buy them new trains. Who wouldn't like a shiny new train? The Obama administration gave your money to California politicians who want to build a 200-m.p.h. train to take people from Los Angeles to San Francisco. Somehow, in the tradition of political boondoggles everywhere, the train that politicians actually approved doesn't yet come close to either city. It starts, and ends, "in the boondocks," says Reason magazine's Adrian Moore.

"I live in a little mountain town called Tehachapi," he says. "It's in the middle of nowhere, 50 miles to the nearest Walmart ... the high-speed rail line in California comes right through my town. This thing is like the boondoggle of boondoggles."

When I confronted train advocate Dennis Lytton about that, he said, "They're starting high-speed rail in the middle of the state because that's where you can build it fast."

He also said, "Private investors will be part of the mix." But when I asked if any have invested so far, he said, "Not at this time."

People who spend their own money know better.

Lytton also claimed that California's Amtrak trains are "packed." So we investigated that claim. It turns out to be far from the truth. On average, California's Amtrak trains are one third full.
Government planning leads to transit systems that lose money on every passenger, airports where there are few passengers or planes and bridges to nowhere.

America does need mass transit. Three hundred million people need to go places. Roads are congested. Who will provide it when government drives transit entrepreneurs out of the business?

Well, instead of building giant rail projects in the boondocks, how about letting people ride buses?

Buses, privately owned buses, are now the fastest growing mass transit in America. Buses are much cheaper than trains. Amtrak charges about $150 to ride from New York to D.C. Buses charge less than $20. And buses don't require new land seizure through eminent domain. Buses aren't locked into straight-line routes. They go where people go. And when people move, buses, unlike trains, change routes.
Let services be paid for by the people who use them and built by people who put potential profits on the line. Otherwise, politicians will take us for a ride.





headline: Pastor Saeed, other Christians caught in the crosshairs, yet nary a word from Obama
byline: By Jay Sekulow


An Islamic terror campaign against Christians in Egypt should be headline-grabbing news. Not so. Few media outlets are focusing on the story behind the story in Egypt -- a calculated assault against Egypt’s ancient Christian community.

In recent weeks, the violence in Egypt --fueled by hate-filled radical Muslims -- has resulted in the murder of Coptic Christians and the destruction of dozens of churches. Radical Islamists have even paraded Christian nuns through the streets like prisoners of war.

Supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood, an anti-American, anti-Israel terrorist group, put red paint on Christian homes and businesses -- marking them as targets.

The attacks are so unrelenting that even one Egyptian church, which has been open for 1,600 years, had to close its doors -- cancelling services for the first time ever -- because of the violence.

Christian pastor Saeed Abedini faces eight years in an Iranian prison. He’s been imprisoned now for nearly one year, subjected to beatings and torture, simply because of his Christian faith.

The assault on Christians is not confined to Egypt. We see it in our work in Pakistan, where Christians are also singled out and face grave dangers because of their faith.

And, just this week, an American citizen experienced religious persecution first-hand when a court in Iran rejected his appeal. Christian pastor Saeed Abedini faces eight years in prison. He’s been imprisoned now for nearly one year, subjected to beatings and torture, simply because of his Christian faith.

The disturbing decision by Iran’s judiciary violates the universally-respected principles of protecting human rights and religious freedom. And, the decision seems to indicate that it is business as usual Iran -- even under the new President Hassan Rohani.

In fact, one of the judges who rejected the appeal, Judge Ahmad Zargar, was sanctioned by the European Union for issuing long-term sentences and the death penalty against peaceful protestors.

At the American Center for Law and Justice we represent Pastor Saeed's wife, Naghmeh, and their two young children. The family lives here in the United States.

The latest news out of Iran is devastating for Saeed family and raises two even more important questions: Why is the Obama administration largely silent on this topic? Why isn't President Obama forcefully speaking out, condemning this assault on Christians?

Let's go back to Egypt for a moment. As the anti-Christian violence there escalates, President Obama has said very little about the slaughter.

Here's what he said just days ago: "We believe that … the rights of … religious minorities should be respected . . . ."

That's it?

Where's the outrage? Where's the condemnation?

President Obama won't even use the word "Christians" to address the fact that it is, indeed, Coptic Christians -- who make up approximately 10% of Egypt’s population, who are in the crosshairs in Egypt.

What's worse, the president's spokesman used the assault on Christians to make an awkward joke.

When the White House was asked directly about this disturbing situation by Fox News’ Ed Henry, “With people being killed, Christians in particular being targeted, churches being destroyed, what’s the president’s red line in Egypt?”

The White House’s official response was “Well, I didn’t bring my red pen out with me today.”

This is what we get from the White House? A flippant, tasteless joke about the murder of Christians in Egypt.

And when it comes to the imprisonment of an American Christian, a U.S. citizen, in Iran, there is not a peep out of President Obama. Not a word.

Secretary of State Kerry did express his concern about Pastor Saeed on two occasions, the most recent statement coming Wednesday from the State Department.

But with an American imprisoned in Iran, the president should be out front, using the influence of his office, his bully pulpit, to condemn Iran's actions and demand the release of Pastor Saeed. Especially now that the Iranian judicial system has rejected Pastor Saeed's appeal.

“I am extremely disappointed that President Obama has chosen to remain silent on this critical human and religious rights case of an American imprisoned in Iran,” said Naghmeh Abedini, Pastor Saeed’s wife.

“My husband is serving eight years in the notorious Evin prison and facing daily threats and abuse by radicals because he refuses to deny his Christian faith. And yet, President Obama, has not spoken a word about him.”

The United States should be leading the way for human rights and religious freedom.

The president has a real opportunity, in fact, a responsibility, to take the lead in defending religious freedom, whether it's Coptic Christians being murdered in the streets of Cairo, or a U.S. citizen facing life-threatening conditions in a prison cell in Tehran simply because of his Christian faith.





headline: Our Surgeon General needs to slap a warning label on Facebook
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


The data now exist for Acting Surgeon General Rear Admiral Boris D. Lushniak, M.D., MPH to place a warning label on the Facebook homepage, not unlike that which exists on packages of tobacco cigarettes.

Facebook has been linked, in numerous clinical trials both here and around the world, to feelings of intense envy, dissatisfaction with life, insomnia, major depression, disrupted friendships and feelings of isolation -- especially in young people.

Facebook may well be addictive, as well—just like tobacco.

Facebook has been linked to feelings of intense envy, dissatisfaction with life, insomnia, major depression, disrupted friendships and feelings of isolation—especially in young people.

Many young people have told me, in my practice of psychiatry, that they want to stop using Facebook and feel it negatively impacts their lives, but “just can’t stop.” My colleagues tell me they are hearing the same thing from their patients.

The number of people at risk for psychological damage from Facebook is in the hundreds of millions, in North America alone (with hundreds of millions more at risk, around the globe). And, I would argue, there is now plenty of evidence that people should be warned by the nation’s most prominent public health official that, “Academic research studies have determined that using Facebook may be dangerous to your health and may cause serious psychiatric symptoms.” In the alternate, a warning could state, “Academic Research Suggests Facebook Use Is Addictive and May Cause Psychiatric Disorders.”

Placing such a warning on Facebook would be a first, serious step by the U.S. government to alert the public to known hazards of Facebook use, and over-use. It would also set the stage for putting Facebook on notice that they cannot ignore the growing number of studies that link their product to more than one illness. 

I have written before that class action lawyers are, no doubt, eyeing Facebook for its liability in causing or deepening psychiatric disorders in, perhaps, hundreds of thousands of cases.

The only reason the Surgeon General would fail to act would be if he considers psychiatric/psychological disorders to not be as serious as physical ones. Because if it were seriously suspected -- and backed up by studies around the world -- that swimming pools were causing diabetes or hypertension in hundreds of thousands of Americans, you can bet there would be posters required to warn folks of the possible danger.

Certainly, the National Institute of Mental Health should launch a very large scale trial of the impact of Facebook on adolescents and teenagers, to start with. But there is no reason to wait for that more expanded data to flow in.

Facebook endangers users’ psychological well-being. I believe the company knows this -- or should know it -- and bear liability for any harm done users from use/overuse of the drug they are selling, from today, forward. And, I believe the Surgeon General knows it, too. Now, he should make sure all Americans are put on notice. 





headline: What King's daughter thinks of America 50 years after her father's dream
byline: By Kelly Wright


Wednesday marks the 50th Anniversary of the historic "March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom." On that day, Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Junior, stood on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial to deliver one of the most powerful speeches in American history: "I Have A Dream."

It was a dream that set into motion the changing of race relations in America. Dr. King's leadership in the non-violent struggle for civil rights earned him the distinction of being called a "drum major for justice, a drum major for peace."

But to his four children, he was simply known as "daddy."

Dr. King was mindful of his children when he delivered his famous address, "I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character."

Bernice King believes that her dad’s dream for his children to be judged by the content of their character has, in many ways, become a reality.  

Dr. King's youngest child, Bernice King, has followed in her father’s footsteps, becoming an ordained minister. She believes that her dad’s dream for his children to be judged by the content of their character has, in many ways, become a reality. She says, “new generations of people have benefited greatly because of the dream but we still have more work to do.”

King recently talked to me about her reflections of her father. Her dad’s incredible contribution to the world, she explained, is a result of his extraordinary faith in God. As I talked with her, she told me that everything her daddy did, came out of his personal commitment to Jesus Christ.

King recalls how her dad's deep faith helped him overcome the pressures from leading the non-violent struggle for Civil Rights, particularly when the burden became too heavy to bear: "I remember in the beginning when he was about to give up because he got a call that threatened to blow up his home where my mom and my sister were. He was in the kitchen and just before midnight, he told God; I'm at the end of my powers. I'm just down here trying to do right. Why do I have to deal with all of these evil and wicked people? Why are people so mean-spirited? Why can't people understand goodness and the good works we're trying to do? Why is there so much hate?"

King continued that her dad had grown weary and felt he could not continue; he was at the end of his rope. She explained to me; "It was at that point that he said he heard the voice of God say; "Martin Luther King, Junior! Stand up for justice! Stand up for righteousness! And I will be with you until the end."

Essentially, Dr. King went through what I refer to as a "Jesus in the garden of Gethsemane" moment. King was facing the very real threat of death for seeking to do what was right in the eyes of God. He knew in the eyes of man, if he would continue to carry his cross of love for humanity, the very depravity of mankind could crush him and his family. But from that encounter with God in his kitchen, his extraordinary faith compelled him to keep moving forward with his noble cause, even in the face of death.

Scripture tells us when we encounter adversity as King surely did, "We are hard pressed on every side, but not crushed; perplexed, but not abandoned; struck down, but not destroyed. Therefore we do not lose heart."

Of her daddy's accomplishments, Bernice humbly says, "It's emotional to know that you're connected to a man who had such a great impact on this world. It’s a humbling experience to know that he's my dad."

Dr. King, a dedicated Baptist minister with brilliant oratory skills, the academic prowess of a scholar, and the wisdom of a prophet, faithfully and courageously challenged America to embrace his dream of a better, stronger and united America. I asked Bernice how we have gone astray in fulfilling that dream.

"It goes back to economics and spirituality. Those two issues I think are very critical. And the whole fervor of materialism in our society and self-centeredness has taken us away. And so, instead of people focusing on God first and everything else next, we've reversed those priorities. So our values and our priorities are off."

She adds; "Daddy talked about this in 1967. He forewarned that if we're not careful, we will become a "thing" oriented society and not "people centered" and all of these different crises are going to emerge. And that's what's been happening."

With that, King's daughter acknowledged how the world has shattered her daddy’s dream. She points out how we are still confronted with poverty, crippling illiteracy, poor education, and senseless violence. "You think about what happened in Newtown, Connecticut. I mean that should have jolted us like nothing else. We saw 6-year-olds losing their life so senselessly. I'm thinking about Chicago and all of those young people who are killing each other. What has happened to a society that has turned away from that kind of situation and not realize this speaks to who "we are." as a nation and a cancer in our society. The situation with Trayvon Martin, everyday there are several Trayvon Martins; not in the black community but in the Hispanic/Latino communities and other communities.

Were he living today, Dr. King would listen to politicians, civil rights and faith leaders agitate bloviate, instigate and aggravate. Then he would seek to elevate, motivate and demonstrate God's view for healing the painful wounds of the past and bridge the deep divide with the bonds of reconciliation. 

In 1963, as he sat in a Birmingham jail, he wrote about becoming an extremist to deal with the extreme issues of hate and division.

He advised Americans to become more like Jesus as an extremist in love -- "your enemies, bless them that curse you, pray for them who despitefully use you."

His daughter says, "One of the most important traits in unconditional love is the capacity to forgive. It's very easy to become bitter. It's very easy to become angry. It’s very easy to want to take revenge or retaliation. We must have the capacity to have the mentality that says by destroying them; part of me is being destroyed because they're part of my humanity.

"My dad lost his life but look at what the world has gained. Even though he didn't make it to see that Promised Land he talked about and everybody hasn't made it to this Promised Land he talked about but there are people that are benefiting from the life and ultimate sacrifice that he made."

Reflecting on King's legacy, we would serve ourselves well if we could follow his example of spiritual depth, courageous leadership and unselfish service. Let us remember that Dr. King once said; "I have decided to stick with love. Hate is too great a burden to bear."





headline: Professor tells students Republicans 'raped'  America
byline: By Todd Starnes


Editor's note: Michigan State University announced Thursday that Professor William Penn has been reassigned. The university released a statement saying, “some of his comments were inappropriate, disrespectful and offensive and may have negatively affected the learning environment.” The Michigan GOP issued a statement denouncing Penn’s remarks and demanded his resignation. “His use of political intimidation is shameful and should not be tolerated,” Michigan GOP Chairman Bobby Schostak said.

Michigan State University is investigating a video that purportedly shows a professor telling his class that Republicans were a bunch of “dying white people” who “raped this country” and wanted to prevent black people from voting.

“MSU is thankful we’ve been made aware of the situation,” spokesman Kent Cassella tells me. “We will be looking into it.”

The video was secretly filmed Aug. 29th by a student on the first day of a creative writing class. The professor can be seen and heard railing against Republicans and disparaging former presidential candidate Mitt Romney’s wife.

The watchdog group Campus Reform, which first reported the incident, identified the professor as William Penn. According to his online biography, Penn teaches in the university’s creative writing program and is a founding member of the Native American Writer’s Circle.

American taxpayers are being forced to pay the salaries of aging liberals who are using their classrooms to intimidate conservative students.

MSU said they were not prepared to identify the professor and Penn did not return numerous messages seeking comment.

The student asked to remain anonymous over fears of reprisal. However, I have verified the individual’s identity. The student is a sophomore political science major.

Once his professor started talking about politics, the student started filming the discussion. He then sent the video to Campus Reform, a website that routinely exposes bias on college campuses.

“I had seen videos on Campus Reform before that dealt with these issues and I could not believe it was happening,” he told me. “The terrible words he fired off about Republicans were very disconcerting.”

“If you go to the Republican convention in Florida, you see all of the old Republicans with the dead skin cells washing off them,” the professor can be heard telling students on the video.

“They are cheap. They don't want to pay taxes because they have already raped this country and gotten everything out of it they possibly could.”

At one point during the eight-minute video, the professor accused Republicans of devising a plan for "getting black people not to vote."

“They don't want to pay for your tuition because who are you?" he asked. "Well, to me you are somebody."

He also issued a veiled threat to his students.

“I’m a college professor,” he said. “If I find out you are a closet racist I am coming after you.

He told them the country is “still full of closet racists.”

“What do you think is going on in South Carolina and North Carolina. Voter suppression. Its about getting black people not to vote. Why? Because black people tend to vote Democratic.”

“Why would would Republicans want to do it?” he asked. “Because Republicans are not a majority in this country anymore. They are a bunch of dead white people."

The professor also berated former Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and his wife, Ann.

“Ann Romney a first lady?” he asked. “And remember this if you are just going to be a greedy bastard all your life and just try to get things (unintelligible) In order to be rich like Mitt Romney and hide all your income offshore, in the Cayman Islands, you have to be -- think about it -- Mitt Romney. Anybody here want to be Mitt Romney? Him? I mean (sigh) married to her?”

The student also told me that the attacks on the Romneys were the most troubling part of the lecture.

“He made fun of her voice and kept scoffing at their relationship,” the student told Fox News. “You can make fun of a candidate and their party all you want but when you get personal, when you start attacking their spouse in the way he did, it’s inexcusable.”

Cassella said the university is taking the matter seriously.

“At MSU it is important the classroom environment is conducive to a free exchange of ideas and is respectful of the opinions of others,” he said.

But that’s little comfort to the young political science major who filmed the episode. He said this type of liberal bias is commonplace on college campuses around the nation. And he said many conservative students feel intimidated by left wing professors.

“I have felt it necessary to write a few papers with a left-leaning bias out of fear of receiving a lower grade for writing what I truly believe,” the student told me.

The Michigan State University video is further evidence that American taxpayers are being forced to pay the salaries of aging liberals who are using their classrooms to intimidate conservative students and advance a far-left, anti-American agenda.

There’s an old Southern saying – you can’t teach stupid. Sadly, on many of our public university campuses, stupid is doing the teaching.





headline: Time for GOP to deliver a crushing blow to ObamaCare
byline: By Bill Wilson


Three-and-a-half years ago, every single Republican member of the U.S. House of Representatives – and 34 Democrats – voted against Barack Obama’s socialized medicine bill. And since taking control of the House following the 2010 elections – thanks in large measure to anti-ObamaCare fervor – numerous votes to repeal this job-crippling monstrosity have been cast.

In fact, just prior to departing for the August 2013 recess, the House approved a bill sponsored by Rep. Tom Price, R-Ga., blocking Obama’s scandal-plagued Internal Revenue Service from enforcing any portion of the new law.

Every Republican supported this measure – as did four Democrats.

Of course, any ObamaCare repeal vote is dead on arrival in the Senate – meaning the GOP has only one real option if it is serious about scuttling this abomination. That option? Attach a legislative rider to the upcoming budget resolution defunding the measure entirely -- and then batten down the hatches, vowing to vote against any amended spending resolution containing ObamaCare funding.

In other words, Republicans must strip ObamaCare from the upcoming appropriations measure – and reject any effort by the Senate to re-insert it. Doing so would force Obama and his allies to either accept a spending plan that does not contain ObamaCare funding – or shut down the government in protest.

In years past, Republicans have been reticent to invite a shutdown of government – fearing backlash from the liberal media. But the debate over defunding ObamaCare is different.

In addition to blocking the most dangerous legislation America has seen in decades, this is a rare opportunity for the GOP to win a shutdown debate

For starters, a majority of Americans remain opposed to this new law. According to Gallup, 52 percent of Americans oppose ObamaCare, compared to just 44 percent who support it. Meanwhile, Rasmussen found 53 percent of U.S. voters oppose the law (including 42 percent who strongly oppose it) compared to only 41 percent who support it (and only 15 percent who strongly support it).

Assuming those numbers don’t convince Republicans to zero ObamaCare funding out of the upcoming budget resolution, new Gallup polling released last week further underscores Obama’s weakened negotiating position.

According to the latest Gallup survey, Obama’s approval rating in August dipped three points to 44 percent. While that isn’t necessarily a huge month-to-month decline, a look at the underlying data demonstrates Obama’s rapidly weakening position on several critical issues central to the ObamaCare debate.

On the economy, Obama’s August approval rating plunged seven points to 35 percent, while on taxes it slipped from 41 to 36 percent. Meanwhile on the deficit it fell from 31 to 26 percent. Now, align the data with the results of a Fox News poll (also released last week) which showed 71 percent of Americans saying they believe ObamaCare will raise taxes and 65 percent saying it will add to the deficit.

Those are compelling numbers – and they should serve to compel the GOP to mount a unified front in support of ObamaCare’s defunding. You’d better believe that’s what former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi would be doing if the shoe were on the other foot – and with good reason. In addition to blocking the most dangerous legislation America has seen in decades, this is a rare opportunity for the GOP to win a shutdown debate – because the only way government grinds to a halt in this case is if Obama and his allies decide their socialized medicine law is worth that risk.

Any fear or timidity on the part of Republicans regarding a shutdown debate over ObamaCare has no basis in reality – unless certain elements of the GOP secretly want this law to go into effect and are looking for an excuse to let that happen.

Accordingly, GOP “leaders” – particularly Mike Simpson of Idaho, Fred Upton of Michigan, Hal Rogers of Kentucky and Peter King of New York – need to get on board with the defunding plan. Otherwise the tail will truly be wagging the dog within the GOP.

Republicans are sitting opposite an increasingly unpopular president trying to ram through a consistently unpopular law – one that is clearly not ready to be implemented. They must seize this victory – not snatch another defeat from victory’s jaws.



headline: GOP leaders should let Allah sort out Syria's Islamic civil war
byline: By Daniel Horowitz


Editor's note: The following commentary originally appeared on RedState.com.

As bankrupt as elected Republican leadership is in Washington vis-à-vis domestic policy, they are completely clueless as it relates to foreign policy. 

While America continues to become an economic and moral wasteland under this regime, Obama is attempting to spend American treasure helping one nefarious side of an Islamic civil war in Syria – one which involves Iran-allied supporters of Hezbollah (Assad regime) vs. predominantly Al Qaeda affiliated rebels.

Astoundingly, most GOP leaders are either siding with Obama or are totally insouciant to this reckless fomenting of an Islamic insurrection. Instead of fighting ObamaCare, they are allowing Obama to distract from the upheaval at home by focusing on this inane escapade in Syria.

Most media figures discuss the current foreign policy debate in broad platitudes pitting so-called neo-conservatives vs. libertarians, hawks vs. doves, or interventionists vs. isolationists. But these labels are non-sequiturs to the reality of the current debate. 

Most mainstream conservatives are not Ron Paul libertarians who don’t support any war on terror. Quite the contrary, we support a robust intervention to repel Islamic terrorism when it threatens our interests. But in the case of Libya, Syria, and Egypt, we are actually intervening on behalf of our enemies.

Granted, Syria is more complicated than the other two examples. Bashar Assad is a sworn enemy of the United States, the closest ally of Iran, and a prolific exporter of terror. 

In a perfect world, it would be great to overthrow him and stick it to Iran (and their Russian allies). But the reality is that the strongest elements of the insurgency are saturated with Al Qaeda affiliated extremists, backed by Pan-Islamist Turkish President Recep Erdogen, much like the insurgencies in other countries.

Why place American money and weapons in the hands of people who will be just as adversarial to our interests as the current regime? This is not a matter of opposing intervention for the sake of isolationism; it is a matter of not supporting intervention that is either superfluous or deleterious to our national interests. 

A “hawkish” stance towards Assad is a dovish stance towards Al Qaeda. As Sarah Palin noted, in a battle with Russia, Iran, and Hezbollah on one side and Al-Qaeda and Turkey on the other, let Allah sort it out.

This should be a slam dunk opportunity for GOP leaders to oppose a wrongheaded and unpopular intervention, while shifting the focus back to the ObamaCare civil war at home. 

Yet, House leaders are either ambivalent or downright supportive of Obama’s planned strike on behalf of Al Qaeda. 

In the Senate, Mitch McConnell put out his signature mealy-mouthed parsing of words, declining to take a stand on any contentious issue:

“Today the President advised me that he will seek an authorization for the use of force from the Congress prior to initiating any combat operations against Syria in response to the use of chemical weapons. The President’s role as commander-in-chief is always strengthened when he enjoys the expressed support of the Congress.”

So much for the clout and power of being “GOP Leader:”

Our only interest in Syria is ensuring that as many Islamists on both sides are killed and keep each other busy so they can’t affect our national interests or threaten Israel. 

As long as the war is contained to Syria, a stalemate is the best outcome for our purposes so that neither Russia, Iran, Al Qaeda or other Islamists claim an outright victory. 

Sadly, in a world of seven billion, there are innocent people killed on a daily basis due to civil wars. But we lack the resources or strategic plan to help those people in Syria without gratuitously tipping the scales to one of our arch enemies.

Some conservatives are concerned about evincing an image of weakness to our enemies by not following through with the ‘red line’ threat. Undoubtedly, they are correct about Obama’s self-contradictory policy in a wrongheaded intervention. But it is still a wrongheaded intervention, and the fact that he made the threat to begin with should not engender a need to fix that bad policy with another bad policy decision.

When Congress returns from the August recess, Republicans should vote with a unified voice against this ridiculous escapade, and summarily reconvene the fight against ObamaCare. 

Our freedom and way of life should take priority over bailing out a beleaguered group of Muslim Brotherhood and Al Qaeda fighters.It’s time Republicans realize that.





headline: Fifty years after 'I Have a Dream,' America is still divided
byline: By Travis L. Gosa


Over the weekend, thousands of people gathered on the National Mall to commemorate the upcoming 50th anniversary of the 1963 March on Washington For Jobs and Freedom.

In his iconic “I Have a Dream” speech, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. called for America’s “bank of justice” to repay a metaphorical check of freedom and security to African-Americans, and to abandon racial separation for national unity. Unfortunately, civil-rights progress has stalled over the past half-century, while new attacks on social equality threaten to bankrupt the nation.

Fifty years after a great day for civil-rights, the daily experience of the average African-American is still marked by racism and exclusion from the “American Dream.”

The symbolism of a Black president has distracted public attention away from the on-going crises in poverty, public education, residential segregation, unemployment, incarceration, and health. Despite the promise of a post-racial America, a litany of social science statistics indicate that a new generation of Black children, in particular, will grow up in communities plagued by concentrated poverty, joblessness, and hopelessness.

Civil-rights progress has stalled over the past half-century, while new attacks on social equality threaten to bankrupt the nation.

Hard-won victories to desegregate our nation’s public schools have been reversed by the courts. A recent report by UCLA’s Civil Rights Project confirms that Black students today are as segregated from white students as they were in the 1960s. According to the study, one out of every six Black and Latino student attends high poverty “apartheid schools” with no White students, few resources, and under qualified teachers.

Our failure to address separate and unequal schooling helps explain why only 10% of Black male 8th graders are reading on grade level, and why only 50% of Black boys are graduating from high school on time. 

In today’s information economy, a college degree is increasingly necessary for middle-class employment, and our global competitiveness relies on a highly trained workforce. Yet, in the nearly 60 years since Brown vs. the Board of Education, the black-white gap in college completion has only widened.

One hundred fifty years after the Emancipation Proclamation, there remains two Black Americas. There is the Black underclass, “new slaves” caught in the revolving door of poverty, despair, miseducation, and incarceration. Worsening material conditions for many Black Americans has coincided with the obliteration of Affirmative Action programs meant to level the playing field in employment and education.

On the other hand, there is a “free” Black elite comprised of the Obama’s, Jay Z’s, and Oprah’s who have extraordinary political and economic privilege. MLK’s dream of a self-sufficient, Black working and middle-class, whose struggle and merit would result in full inclusion into American society, has yet to become a reality.

At the March on Washington, Dr. King warned about the anger caused by the “unspeakable horrors of police brutality.” In this month’s ruling against NYPD’s controversial “Stop-and-Frisk” policy, Judge Scheindlin describes how millions of innocent Black and Latino citizens were humiliated and demeaned by intrusive police surveillance between 2002 and 2013.

A report by one organization suggests that police and vigilantes shot and killed 313 Black males in 2012, the equivalent of one Black man every 28 hours. Not one officer or “concerned” citizen has been convicted.

Rage and distrust of the criminal justice system have reached a boiling point after George Zimmerman’s acquittal in the killing of Treyvon Martin, a tragedy that has divided America along racial lines and reopened the wounds of Jim Crow lynching circa Emmett Till.

On August 28, 2013, the day of the 50th anniversary, President Obama will speak from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. His speech comes at a dangerous moment for U.S. race relations.

A Black family in the White House has sparked a resurgence of racial paranoia and hate-mongering. As the Southern Poverty Law Center has documented, hate groups and militia memberships are up over 800% since Obama was first elected.

Gun sales have also skyrocketed 90%, with 73 million background checks for gun purchases since Obama has been in office.

Sadly, Obama’s desire for his “MLK moment” will likely be undermined by two realities. First, MLK’s words were buoyed in a sea of 250,000 protesters who represented decades of strategic lunch counter sit-ins, grassroots organizing, and audacious hope practiced by youth activists of the Civil Rights generation.

However articulate Obama’s speech, it will be delivered in the cultural context of drive-by activism of the YouTube-Twitter generation too focused on online protests and celebrity driven politics.

If there is a new Civil Rights movement on the horizon, the revolution will not be Tweeted.

Second, the March on Washington called for the restoration of freedom for all Americans. Yet, worker’s rights, women’s rights and reproductive freedom, environmental justice, and privacy are all under siege in Obama’s America.

Given the administration’s track record on trampling civil liberties through warrantless surveillance, the prosecution of whistleblowers, and drone assassinations of foreign nationals, Mr. Obama has yet to demonstrate the moral vision and restraint necessary to unite the nation and realize Dr. King’s dream.





headline: Obama's fall from grace sets a scary precedent for future presidents
byline: By Diane Black


The increasing lawlessness with which President Barack Obama has been acting in his second term is not going unnoticed.

In fact, in a strong rebuke last week to the unilateral actions being taken by the Obama administration, a federal appeals court came down hard on the administration’s Nuclear Regulatory Commission by ruling that delaying a decision on a proposed nuclear waste storage facility was in violation of federal law. In the majority opinion, the judges declared that the administration was “simply flouting the law,” and that President Obama “may not decline to follow a statute or prohibition simply because of policy objections.”

President Obama’s fall from grace as the candidate elected to rein in executive power in 2008 is more than tragic – it sets scary new precedents for the behavior of future presidents from either party.

Just take for example how President Obama has selectively enforced his own health care law:













The precedent these actions set for future administrations should scare all Americans.

At a press conference before the President left town on vacation, he was asked about his decision to pick and choose what parts of the law he enforced. His response was that, “in a normal political environment,” he would have contacted the Speaker of the House and asked for help to “tweak” the law. One must wonder what the President considers a “normal” political environment – is it one where his party controls the House and has a super majority in the Senate?



Again, the precedent these actions set for future administrations should scare all Americans. And they should worry the President as well. If President Obama can unilaterally decide which parts of the law he must enforce, what is to prevent the next president, regardless of party, from unilaterally deciding to not enforce these and other laws passed by Congress? And how far is he willing to test Americans’ patience with his increasingly imperial presidency?



Congressman Diane Black represents Tennessee's 6th congressional district and serves on the House Ways and Means and Budget Committees. She has been a registered nurse for more than 40 years.





headline: Can Obama act on Syria without appearing to be a hypocrite or a fraud?
byline: By Anne Bayefsky


The Syrian problem threatens the very core of the Obama doctrine. Bashing President Bush for doing an end run around the U.N. Security Council over Iraq was Obama’s nom de guerre.

With Russia's leaders making it clear that they are not going to approve a Council resolution authorizing the use of force against Syria, how can the president act without appearing to be a hypocrite or a fraud? The answer is: he can’t.

In the case of Libya, a Security Council resolution was sufficiently general that the United States and its allies could claim there was approval for military action and the removal of Col. Muammar Qaddafi. It was March 17, 2011 and the Council authorized member states “acting nationally or through regional organizations or arrangements ... to take all necessary measures ... to protect civilians” in Libya. The Russians aren’t about to make the same mistake twice.

In our age of advanced weaponry, sophisticated technology and undeniable interconnectedness, “Syria” threatens the peace and security of America and our closest democratic ally, Israel.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said on Monday that "using force without the approval of the UN Security Council is a very grave violation of international law." Russian and Chinese vetoes have already been cast three times on Syria over what even former U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice called “very mild resolutions” that didn’t even contain sanctions. If France, Britain or the United States try again, they can expect a fourth nyet.

This leaves President Obama with a serious quandary. When President Bush asked the Security Council for the 18th resolution on Iraq, he set up the Council as the legitimatizing institution.

Failing to get that stamp of approval then destroyed his chances of cogently arguing a resolution wasn’t necessary in the first place.

The dilemma is multiplied many times over for President Obama, who has said umpteen times that the U.N. is the center of his universe. As recently, as last Friday, the president told CNN: “If the U.S. goes in and attacks another country without a U.N. mandate and without clear evidence that can be presented, then there are questions in terms of whether international law supports it…” Lavrov couldn’t agree more.

In September 2009, President Obama bounded up to the U.N. General Assembly podium and announced: “We've re-engaged the United Nations… We have sought…a new era of engagement with the world.” He would “begin a new chapter of international cooperation” and he promised “we will work with the U.N.” In short, Gulliver marched into the UN and demanded to be tied down.

Ditto with the U.N. Human Rights Council. Having lectured for five years that this anti-American anti-Israel cesspool is the best place to handle the world’s human rights problems, how is the President going to explain that it isn’t up to the task?

In theory the Syria problem is right up the U.N. alley. Purpose number one of the U.N., according to its Charter, is “to maintain international peace and security.” Protecting human rights of people within a state has become a matter of international peace and security in Syria for lots of reasons. 1.8 million refugees in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq, battles in Lebanon with pro-Assad Hezbollah forces, and the involvement of foreign combatants in Syria, to name a few.

Syria is not just about saving Syrians from Syrians. In fact, it is about the international tentacles of Iran – Assad’s essential benefactor.

Here, however, the president runs into another of his U.N. messes. Susan Rice told reporters on her way out the U.N. door in June, that together with Russia the administration had “been able to find common ground and to effect beneficial outcomes” on thwarting Iran. A Russian veto at this stage blows this U.N. accomplishments storyline to smithereens.

So administration lawyers have been hitting the books desperate for a legal cover. No doubt, it has been a tough slog. Until now, the self-styled human rights president has not been moved to intervene forcefully despite a death toll of 100,000 and counting. Why should another 355 who happened to die from chemical weapons, rather than torture, beheadings, sexual violence, or various other hideous endings, change the equation?

To compound the lawyers’ difficulties, President Obama is famously known for a 2002 speech in which he said ‘no’ to intervention in Iraq despite that fact that Saddam Hussein “is a brutal man. A ruthless man. A man who butchers his own people to secure his own power.” By then Hussein had killed thousands of his own citizens with sarin and mustard gas. So what makes Bashar Assad’s alleged offense different?

The likelihood is that the legal beagles will try the still fledgling, not yet legal, idea of a “responsibility to protect” or try invoking NATO action in Kosovo – a policy which might more accurately be called ‘to hell with the U.N..’

What they are unlikely to try is the most obvious and genuine legal justification for military action against Syria, absent U.N. approval: self-defense.

In our age of advanced weaponry, sophisticated technology and undeniable interconnectedness, “Syria” threatens the peace and security of America and our closest democratic ally, Israel.

Today’s Syria is a toxic combination of Islamic fanatics, terrorists of all kinds, stockpiles of horrible chemical weapons, and depraved Iranian masters poised to acquire the world’s most dangerous weapon.

A self-defense rationale isn’t available to President Obama, however, without a major foreign policy course correction.

He would have to acknowledge a real and sufficiently imminent Iranian threat.

He would have to admit his responsibility to protect Americans from Iran immediately, and not after another fake round of talks.

And, he would have to support openly, and in multiple ways, Israel’s sovereign right to strike Iran as well.

History suggests he will prefer legal babble and humanitarianism for everyone but Americans.





headline: Investigators Probe Blast at Site of Controversial Cross Memorial
byline: By Todd Starnes


Someone ignited an improvised explosive device next to a war memorial cross that a prominent atheist group wanted removed from a public park in Coos Bay, Ore., an attorney for the city told Fox News.

FOLLOW TODD ON FACEBOOK FOR CONSERVATIVE NEWS. CLICK HERE TO JOIN!

An official statement on the city's website called it an act of "criminal mischief" and stated that an "unknown person(s) vandalized the memorial with an improvised explosive device."

“We unfortunately are now to the point where explosive devices are being placed next to crosses,” said Hiram Sasser, director of litigation at the Liberty Institute.

The Texas-based Liberty Institute was hired by the city to determine the constitutionality of the Mingo Park Vietnam War Memorial cross.

The cross is still standing, but did sustain superficial damage, Coos Bay City Manager Roger Craddock told Fox News.

"Other than some charred marks on the cement structure there was no real damage to the memorial," he said.

The blast startled local residents as well as dispatchers at the local police station, according to local news reports.

The cross had been donated to the city in 1972 but had become the center of controversy recently when the Freedom From Religion Foundation sent city officials a letter demanding they remove the cross.

“We have no objection to the veterans’ memorials,” FFRF attorney Rebecca Markert wrote to the city. “Our objection is to the message of endorsement of Christianity over other religions and non-religions.”

The FFRF is a Wisconsin-based group of freethinkers, atheists and agnostics that has a history of targeting small towns and communities on issues regarding public displays of the Christian faith.

“These people will stop at nothing to intimidate communities to tear down their veterans memorials,” Sasser told Fox News. “Now the crazies are trying to blow one up.”

Police are working with explosives specialists from the Oregon State Police but so far they do not have any suspects.

Sasser said it’s fortunate no one was hurt by the blast.

“This memorial is right next to the area where many children play,” Sasser told Fox News. “A child could have been killed or wounded by the IED exploding.”

In May the cross was vandalized. Someone wrote the word "Remove" in the middle of the cross along with a dotted line and arrow to indicate where to "cut."

Sasser called on the FFRF to stop “fanning the flames of hostility toward veterans memorials.”

“There are consequences for fomenting hatred for what were once obscure veterans memorials,” he said. “The FFRF should immediately condemn this dangerous criminal act.”

MARK LEVIN, SEAN HANNITY AND SARAH PALIN SAY YOU NEED TO GET TODD'S LATEST BOOK. CLICK HERE TO GET YOUR COPY OF DISPATCHES FROM BITTER AMERICA.





headline: Mr. Obama, Republicans do have health care solutions
byline: By Rep. Fred Upton


In a troubling denial of reality, President Obama now claims that Republicans have no ideas when it comes to health care, saying “they don’t have an agenda to provide health insurance to people at affordable rates.”

But Republicans do have answers – a lot of them. 

The real problem is the current political alignment in Washington than a lack of ideas. President Obama is singularly focused on implementing his own health care law, not working with those outside his party or in the Congress on better solutions. 

Health care should be as decentralized and regulated as close to the people as possible, not run by Washington mandates. 

The media also recognizes these solutions will be ignored by the White House until there is a new occupant. So even the most sophisticated MRI can’t find a lot of press coverage of GOP health care ideas.

But these political and communications challenges are no excuse for lethargy. Promoting our alternatives and tirelessly working to explain their merits to the American people is essential.

Space does not permit a full inventory of all the Republican congressional health care initiatives, so let’s just highlight a few.

First, however, the principles that tie together our new, innovative, bottom-up thinking deserve mention. 

- We support expanding affordable insurance options for all Americans, but not in a one-size-fits-all way.

- We will protect people with pre-existing conditions, so they are not denied insurance coverage through no fault of their own.

- Health care should be as decentralized and regulated as close to the people as possible, not run by Washington mandates.

- We believe in protecting the coverage Americans like, but also want to expand affordable individual-based options for those who seek new and more affordable plans.

- We preserve and improve Medicare for our seniors by giving them better options and more choices.

- We strengthen the safety net for the poor and disabled by giving governors flexibility to provide higher quality, innovative services for the most vulnerable. And we ensure medical research continues to find cures for challenging diseases like cancer, Alzheimer’s, and diabetes.

These principles are reflected in an assortment of specific legislative and policy proposals Republican lawmakers are working on now, and have offered for the last several years.

Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana will soon unveil a comprehensive alternative to the president’s health care law that provides tax incentives to provide cheaper insurance options, covers those with pre-existing conditions, and other measures that lower the cost of health care.

My colleague Dr. Tom Price of Georgia has introduced the Empowering Patients First Act, another comprehensive alternative to the Affordable Care Act based on many of the same principles.

Representative Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee has offered another affordability solution to allow consumers to purchase insurance across state lines. 

The list of ideas to make private health care more affordable and accessible could go on.

But our menu of health care ideas extends beyond insurance reforms.

Last year, Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah and I proposed ways to improve Medicaid for our most vulnerable populations. Our flexibility plan allows states to experiment with managed care, streamline the waiver process, and provide states financial incentives to offer better and more innovative care models to those most in need.

When it comes to Medicare, House Budget Chairman Paul Ryan of Wisconsin included long-held Republican ideas about Medicare reform in his plan that provides seniors with more choices and options to select the kind of health care plan that best fits their needs, while guaranteeing that this important safety net will be there for future generations.

Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp of Michigan and I are working on other reforms to Medicare that simplify the current complex system of deductibles and co-payments and offer new catastrophic protection. Part of this includes medical liability reform.

After more than two years of work in cooperation with Chairman Camp, the Energy and Commerce Committee in July unanimously advanced a bipartisan solution to finally fix the broken Medicare physician payment program – also known as the Sustainable Growth Rate. Our bipartisan success to put the emphasis back where it belongs – on our patients and their doctors - demonstrates the appetite for and ability to achieve success.

We recognize the importance of addressing health care innovation, as well as health coverage.

We support finding cures and treatments for stubborn diseases that rob family and friends the fullness of life, and we’ve been successful.

Last year we enacted steps to break down barriers to health innovation, including passage of the GAIN Act. This bill will bring doctors more antibiotics to fight life-threatening infections.

Rep. Blackburn is crafting legislation to foster innovation in mobile medical applications and health information technology. The result would be improved patient care, lowered health care costs, and new American jobs.

Despite the dire prognosis of the president, congressional Republicans have a broad assortment of new and innovative health care ideas. As the public learns more about the details and consequences of President Obama’s health care medicine, they will clearly demand a second opinion. We’re ready to provide one – or many.





headline: What is our endgame if America attacks Syria?
byline: By Cal Thomas


“Oh, when will they ever learn? Oh, when will they ever learn?” — Peter, Paul and Mary

By the time you read this, U.S. missiles and bombs may be falling on Syria. Why? Syria hasn’t attacked us. It does not pose a security threat to the United States.

These were arguments made against the Bush administration’s intervention in Iraq by some who now urge us to make war on Syria.

Secretary of State John Kerry, who as a senator was for the funding of U.S. troops in Iraq and Afghanistan, before he was against it, says the United States is certain that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has used chemical weapons on his own people, thus crossing a “red line” established by President Obama. Never mind there were similar reports in June that Assad had used chemical weapons.

This time it means war! Weren’t we told of the “certainty” that Saddam Hussein had chemical weapons?

There is grave danger, including possible terrorism, if we attack Syria. When will we ever learn?

Have we learned nothing?

The future of Iraq is in doubt after a huge American investment of lives and money. Ditto Afghanistan. After U.S. help in toppling Mummar Qaddafi, Libya is anything but stable. Egypt is in turmoil after the Obama administration backed its Muslim Brotherhood-controlled government, whose leader and elected president, Mohamed Morsi, has been ousted by the military.

What makes anyone think bombing Damascus is going to bring positive change?

President Obama has not asked Congress for permission to attack Syria, as President Bush did before attacking Iraq. He hasn’t gone to the feckless United Nations, because Russia and China have announced they will veto any resolution authorizing military force.

The president doesn’t appear to have established anything like a “coalition of the willing,” as President Bush did with Iraq. Britain is with us, as usual, and France has pledged support, but what about the Arab world? The Saudis may be quietly helping, but that appears to be about it.

What’s the endgame?

If by some miracle al-Assad and his leadership are hit by a missile, how do we prevent Al Qaeda, present in Syria, from seizing power? There is a secular faction in Syria, but given the strength of Islamic fundamentalism throughout the region it is doubtful they will play a role.

Misjudging the Middle East has been a bipartisan experience. Hillary Clinton displayed a shocking lack of judgment when she said on CBS’s “Face the Nation” two years ago: “Many of the members of Congress of both parties who have gone to Syria in recent months have said they believe [Assad’s] a reformer,” meaning I suppose he might be better than his father, who killed an estimated 25,000 of his fellow countrymen when his power was challenged.

Two days later Secretary Clinton attempted to walk back her comment, saying she was not speaking for herself or the Obama administration.

In 2007, Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) visited Syria against the wishes of the Bush administration. She said, “The road to Damascus is a road to peace.” That “road” appears to have developed a giant sinkhole.

If the only reason for U.S. intervention in Syria is humanitarian, where is the constitutional justification for that?

There are many other inhumanities throughout the world.

The Congo is one. As Jeffrey Gettleman noted last December in The New York Times: “Congo has become a never-ending nightmare, one of the bloodiest conflicts since World War II, with more than five million dead.”

We’re not intervening there.

A Reuters/Ipsos poll has found that just 9 percent of American respondents favor U.S. military intervention in Syria.

Iran has threatened to strike Israel if the United States attacks Syria. There is grave danger, including possible terrorism, if we attack Syria. When will we ever learn?



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: BIAS BASH: Media ignores ‘Democrat’ label for San Diego mayor accused of harassment
headline: The truth about Obama's plan to attack Syria
byline: By James Jay Carafano


During his second term in the Oval Office, President Obama has become increasingly risk averse. Yet, he seems poised to embark on one his riskiest foreign ventures yet: directly intervening in the Syrian civil war with U.S. military force.

We’ve seen this unfold before:presidents who try to duck the responsibility of leadership often wind up finding themselves led by events and forced to respond, flailingly, under awkward circumstances.

Jimmy Carter experienced this problem. Having been pushed around the world stage, he struggled for ways not to look weak.

Obama's projected foray into Syria is a classic example of a risky military venture: It won’t solve any real problems, and there’s no telling where it might lead.

Attempt #1: The U.S. boycott of the Russian Olympics after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. It proved an inept way to regain international credibility.

There followed Attempt #2: the failed military effort to rescue hostages taken at the U.S. embassy in Tehran.

President Obama has suffered his own string of foreign policy set backs—from Moscow to Beijing to, most dramatically, the deadly disaster at Benghazi. Leery of piling up more foreign failures, the White House has grown increasingly loath to make any key decisions that carry risk.Hence we’ve seen much dithering over the future size of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, much to-ing and fro-ing over how to handle Egypt.

And now comes Syria—a mega-problem that the White House has spent months trying to do nothing about. Having failed to lead, Mr. Obama finds himself backed into a Carter-esque corner, apparently ready to give in to calls to jump into Syria.

Will the widely anticipated attack arise from the Administration’s moral outrage over Assad’s use of chemical weapons last week? That’s highly doubtful.

Earlier use of chemical weapons there—confirmed by U.S. analysis—sparked no response harsher than a verbal reprimand. For a conflict that has already claimed more than 100,000 Syrian lives and displaced over a half-million more, the moral outrage from Washington comes a little late.

Nor is the prospective attack intended to produce regime change, according to White House spokesman Jay Carney.

Rather, the Oval Office seems to be interested mainly in putting on a show of force—and just enough military force to assuage the critics of inaction.

“Punishing” Assad in this fashion is unlikely to have any practical effect on the course of the civil war or in terms of inhibiting the future use of WMD anywhere in the world. And that makes the projected foray a classic example of a risky military venture: It won’t solve any real problems, and there’s no telling where it might lead.

Indeed, the lesson any self-respecting totalitarian regime will likely take away from the “punishment” heaped on Assad is that what they really need is nuclear weapons.

When you have nukes, like North Korea, nobody says “Let’s just lob a few cruise missiles at them to show them who’s boss.” Indeed, one perverse outcome of this incident may be to actually increase the potential for nuclear proliferation among the world’s bad actors.

If President Obama truly believes an attack on Syria is both right and efficacious, he ought to confer with Congress, then rather than rush to hit the “launch” button. It is always wise for the commander-in-chief to consult with the Congress, and there is certainly time for that in this instance.

Rushing to fight before the Congress comes back to town is a tip-off that the administration may not have all the answers it should. Rather, it looks like the president would rather let ‘er rip over the weekend, hope it all turns out okay and count on Congress not to raise a big stink about it if things don’t turn out too bad.

Unfortunately, hope is not a good strategy. When it comes to the use of military force, risky business is bad business.





headline: Stop dithering, Mr. Obama, if US is serious about Syria we must target Assad
byline: By Michael Goodwin


A headline the other day called President Obama a “reluctant warrior.” It was half-right. He’s reluctant, but not much of a warrior.

His feckless, indulgent dithering while Syria burns would be the low point of his foreign policy except for the fact that it is alarmingly typical. The president from the faculty lounge is proving again that he is simply no match for determined adversaries, terrorists and genocidal maniacs.

From the upheavals of the so-called Arab Spring to the “reset” with Russia to the “engagement” with Iran, Obama’s sophomoric habit of leading from behind has reduced the planet’s lone superpower to a paper tiger and emboldened those who would do us harm.

Our commander-in-chief Barack Obama is holding his nose while deigning to squeeze a military operation into his busy schedule. Makes you proud, no?

Nearly five years into his presidency, it is still Amateur Hour in the White House.

The debacle in Syria illustrates what’s wrong with his worldview. While the president was busy apologizing for America, Syria exploded into a civil war that is spreading into other countries and could destabilize the entire region. Believing his rhetoric and pique would pass for a policy, Obama backed himself into a corner with no good options.

We can’t know what would have happened if America had played from its strengths. We only know disaster has followed his reckless decision to abdicate our leadership position.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Iran, North Korea, other genocidal maniacs know what Obama's punt means
byline: By Michael Goodwin


As the scheduled time for President Obama’s address on Syria came and went Saturday, reporters in the Rose Garden could see him through the Oval Office windows, talking on the telephone.

He was probably talking to political guru David Axelrod about the latest polls — just before he demanded that Congress rise above partisanship.

You don’t have to be a cynic to scoff at Obama’s claim that his sudden decision to seek approval for a military strike shows his loyalty to the Constitution. In truth, it is all about saving his own bacon. He talked himself into no-man’s land and is now desperately seeking an escape hatch.

Boxed in from the left and right, at home and abroad, heckled as a hypocrite and a flip-flopper, he didn’t have a single friend, let alone a coalition. So he kicked the can to Congress and challenged its members to make the unpopular decision he’s not willing to make as commander in chief.

Obama talked himself into no-man’s land and is now desperately seeking an escape hatch.

The 11th-hour reversal is a Gilda Radner moment — “Never mind!” She did it as comedy; Obama does it as farce.

For the last week, White House aides have engaged in relentless fear mongering about the dangers of inaction and delay. Even on Saturday, Obama warned that Bashar al-Assad is a global menace, said the use of chemical weapons is a moral outrage that must be punished and warned that potential proliferation is a grave threat to our national security and our allies.

And then he said . . . But.

Or, as the professor in chief put it, he’s decided a military strike is necessary and that he has the authority to launch one, but insists a strike “is not time-sensitive.”

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Mommy, what’s Miley Cyrus doing to that teddy bear?
byline: By Todd Starnes


MTV should consider changing the name of their annual music awards program from the VMAs to the STDs.

Sunday night’s internationally televised broadcast set a new low for filth and debauchery even by MTV’s standards.

It was a great big freak show celebrating all that is wrong with American culture and it was targeted at American school children.

The 2013 VMAs were a great big freak show celebrating all that is wrong with American culture and it was targeted at American school children.

“MTV has once again succeeded in marketing sexually charged messages to young children using former child stars and condom commercials – while falsely rating this program as appropriate for kids as young as 14,” said Dan Isett, of the Parents Television Council. “This is unacceptable.”

It seemed as though every other commercial during the VMAs featured a naked man and woman peddling condoms.

The show itself was a cavalcade of behavior that would have made even the mayors of Sodom and Gomorrah blush.

Lady Gaga opened the MTV show dressed in what appeared to be a nun’s costume. But she quickly shed her clothing and unveiled a get-up that included two strategically-placed sea shells. She then paraded around the stage with a bouquet of flowers protruding from her private parts.

Miss Gaga is no lady.

But her sexcapades paled in comparison to those of Miley Cyrus. She delivered a performance that would make even street corner harlots blush.

The former Disney darling tore off her clothes and danced around in nude-colored panties while doing unmentionable things with giant dancing teddy bears.

It was indeed possible that boys and girls across the nation were collectively asking their parents, “Mommy, what is Miley Cyrus doing to that teddy bear?”

The answer dear readers, involves something called "twerking." It’s a sexually provocative form of dancing that involves lots of jiggling. Google it.

I’m sure her momma and daddy were so proud, but it was a sad day in Pooh Corner.

And when she wasn’t simulating relations with a stuffed animal, Miss Cyrus was incessantly scratching her nether-regions. I’m sure the drug store has an ample supply of creams and ointments to remedy her ailment.

Bless her heart.

The folks at the Parents Television Council were none too happy with Miley’s dirty dancing.

“MTV continues to sexually exploit young women by promoting acts that incorporate ‘twerking’ in a nude-colored bikini,” Isett said. “How is this image of former child star Miley Cyrus appropriate for 14-year-olds? How is it appropriate for children to watch Lady Gaga strip down to a bikini in the opening act?”

The Parents Television Council has a right to be offended – as do the many parents who allowed their children to watch a show that was supposed to be friendly to younger views.

But it’s no surprise that MTV prefers to peddle what amounts to be pornography to the nation’s next generation.

It’s no wonder that families are turning off MTV and turning on shows like Duck Dynasty –- a program that proves American thirsts for shows that are family-friendly.

Honestly, it’s probably a good thing the "Duck Dynasty" gang was not invited to emcee the VMAs.

Uncle Si would’ve taken one look at Lady Gaga’s flower thong and he would’ve grabbed a weed whacker.





headline: Miley Cyrus 'twerking' -- what would Hannah Montana say?
byline: By Penny Young Nance


Let’s see: Britney, Lindsay, and now Miley. Disney produces human train wrecks, and then MTV slaps the faces of American parents as they parade their freak show of objectification in front of our kids. Shame on them -- and on us -- for funding it.

It’s all so ironic because today we mark an important anniversary for women in this country. It was on this date, August 26, 1920, that the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which guaranteed women the right to vote,became law.

On Sunday night, Miley Cyrus exemplified what the end of the road looks like for the “women's liberation”movement. With tongue out, twerking with teddy bears, mouthing “we can kiss who we want, we can screw who we want,” Miley sang, “We Can’t Stop” to gaping mouths in the audience and a firestorm of reaction nationwide. Miley needs to know that in fact, she can stop, and she should.

Miley Cyrus has been on a fast path downward, and our heart breaks to see a young woman appear at the VMAs in such a degrading performance.

The reaction comes not because of her age or upbringing but because she was absolutely classless and self-degrading. Even when she decides to ‘grow up,’ young women will follow in her footsteps. If we continue to tell our young women that they are nothing more than walking private parts, we can be assured they will leave “Hannah Montana” behind in pursuit of the Lindsay Lohan lifestyle we saw last night.

Miley has been on a fast path downward, and our heart breaks to see a young woman so confused and obviously hurting. Women (and men) everywhere are outraged by her VMA performance, but the reality is that you can block MTV, but you still pay for it.

The cable companies pay sub fees to the content provider out of your monthly bill, and therefore the customer bankrolled Miley’s “show” last night.

We’ve had enough.

This should be the last straw for a station that continues to sabotage the future and innocence of our children. If the cable providers, and Congress won’t allow us cable choice then the least they could do is allow us to drop MTV from our package.

I encourage all to call or e-mail your cable provider and ask them to drop MTV and then cancel that trip to Disney this year for good measure. Consumers have power when we use voices and shop our values.

We have long known that MTV is no longer about music. This is not the first time the nation has been shocked at what they choose to air. They so cynically market smut to children, tweens, and teens on a daily basis.

MTV is not funny anymore, and their producers would all do well to see how the American Psychological Association has studied the effects of sexualization on young girls.

As the head of a women’s organization, a mom, and a woman, I mourn for our young women.

I cry out to Miley Cyrus to get it together and go to college. Learn to make money from your brains not your body. You have so much potential, so much to offer the world, do not continue to be the puppet for those who do not see any of that and would rather profit from your exploitation.

Finally, shame on Hollywood. When you have conservatives at Concerned Women for America agreeing with liberal Mika Brzezinski, co-host of MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” you know you have gone too far.

Less than a hundred years after our nation guaranteed women the right to vote, after decades of societal development for women, we cry out for this degradation of our self-respect to end.

Come on ladies, we can do better. We are better.





headline: Todd's American Dispatch: Feds forced churches to get baptism permits
byline: By Todd Starnes


For as far back as anyone can remember, Missouri Baptists have gathered on river banks for Sunday afternoon baptisms.

The preacher leads the new believers into the water, draped in white robes as a choir sings, “Shall We Gather at the River.”

It’s the way it’s been done for generations – baptizing in creeks, lakes, and rivers “in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.”

But now the long-cherished tradition of “taking the plunge” has been drawn into a controversy with the federal government.

Many Christians believe the Bible commands new followers of Christ to be baptized immediately after their conversion.

The National Park Service began enforcing a policy recently that required churches to obtain special use permits in order to baptize in public waters. As part of the same permit process, the NPS also mandated that churches give the Park Service 48 hours advance notice of pending baptisms.

But as any Baptist or Pentecostal in good standing knows – that’s a problem.

“If the Holy Spirit is working on Sunday morning, you’re going to baptize Sunday afternoon,” Dennis Purcell told The Salem News. “You may not know ahead of time.”

Many Christians believe that the Bible commands new followers of Christ to be baptized immediately after their conversion. It’s a public expression and celebration of their new-found faith in Christ.

The National Park Service told local churches the permits were needed to “maintain park natural/cultural resources and quality visitor experiences, specific terms and conditions have been established.”

The feds also closed vehicle access to a sandbar along a popular creek in the Ozark Mountains, meaning churches could no longer drive their elderly members to the outdoor baptisms. And to make sure the Baptists behaved, they placed large boulders in the area to block car traffic.

“Like the Baptists and Pentecostals are going to harm natural resources and adversely affect quality visitor experiences by occasionally baptizing new converts?” asked local resident Lewis Leonard. “I can think of a whole lot more activities along the river ways that are not conducive to maintain the natural resources.”

Rep. Jason Smith fired off a letter to the feds on Aug. 21 demanding answers.

“I am very troubled by any federal rule that requires churches to apply for a permit for the purpose of baptism, especially when these traditional activities have been done in the rivers and streams of this nation since its founding,” the congressman wrote.

He pointed out the National Park Service does not require a 48-hour notification from fisherman or swimmers – so why churches?

“One would hope that the answer is not ‘because the National Park Service wants to limit the number of baptisms performed on the river.”

The Park Service responded within 24 hours. They said the reason they needed two days notice is to “give the park staff adequate time to prepare the permit.”

But based on local outrage – and Rep. Smith’s promise to bring the matter before Congress, the Park Service had a change of heart.

“As of today, the park’s policy has been clarified to state that no permit will be required for baptisms within the Riverways,” Supt. William Black wrote in a letter to the congressman. “I can assure you the National Park Service has no intention of limiting the number of baptisms performed within the park.”

Rep. Smith called the decision a “victory for common sense.”

“The notion that permits would be required for baptisms on our riverways is ridiculous,” he said.
It’s not the first time government officials have tried to discourage public baptisms.

In Olympia, Wash., a church was denied a permit to hold a baptism at Heritage Park a few weeks ago. Their request was rejected because the attorney general said the religious sacrament was a violation of the state constitution.

In 2011, a church’s beach baptism was shut down by lifeguards in Miami.

But while the government cracks down on public expressions of the Christian faith, they are embracing public expressions of the Islamic faith – many times at taxpayer expense.

Universities across the nation are spending thousands of dollars to install foot baths so Muslim students can wash their feet before their five-times-a-day prayers.

The New York Times reported that the University of Michigan-Dearborn spent $25,000 to install the foot-washing stations in restrooms. The university defended the expenditure, claiming it was for health and safety measures, not religion.

A number of airports have spent public tax dollars to provide foot-washing basins for Muslim taxi drivers. One Arizona airport went so far as to provide prayer rugs.

And San Francisco International Airport renovated a building to create a house of worship for Muslim workers. Airport officials declined to reveal how much tax money was spent, but a spokesman told the San Francisco Chronicle they just wanted to maintain “a good relationship with ground transportation providers.”

So there you have it, good readers. Our government increasingly affords accommodation to the Muslim faith, while attempting to regulate the Christian faith.

It reminds me of something John Adams once wrote: “Nothing is more dreaded than the national government meddling with religion.”





headline: 50 years later, King is alive, waking from his dream
byline: By Juan Williams


Wednesday marks 50 years after the March on Washington.

It also marks 50 years since I was a little boy with a dad. Fifty years ago my dad with his brown skin could not have been a political analyst for a major network. He could not have been an editorial writer and White House correspondent for a major paper. I did those jobs for The Washington Post. And 50 years ago he could not have lived in an integrated neighborhood in most of America. I do.

The changing realities of my life as compared to my dad’s life is one of many reasons the United States has to be proud of the progress we as a nation have made for the civil and economic rights of African-Americans since the March on Washington.

However, like the ‘Eye of Providence’ that sits atop the unfinished pyramid on the Great Seal of the United States, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Dream” also sees a nation still struggling to make sure young people of every color can be born free of poverty, have get an education, and still move up and achieve their American dream.

Fifty years ago my dad with his brown skin could not have been a political analyst for a major network.

There is nothing wrong with the truth that we as a nation are still at work at achieving true equality. America is constant experiment in democracy, a constant reach to live up to the ideals expressed by the Founding Fathers of equality for all.

Civil rights leaders often dodge the answer to the question “How Far” we have come in 50 years. They don’t want to acknowledge how much has changed for fear that others will think race is no longer a factor. Race is obviously still a factor by rates of unemployment, poverty, infant mortality, incarceration and life expectancy.

But telling the truth about the great strides made in the last 50 years to achieve Dr. King’s vision of the sons of slaves and sons of slave owners sitting together, judging each other on the basis of character and not skin color, is an inspiring story even if there are some goals still over the horizon.

Just think about how bizarre it would have sounded 50 years ago if a speaker at the March on Washington predicted a black president shortly after the turn of the century.

On Sunday, Georgia Congressman John Lewis, the last surviving speaker from the 1963 March, spoke to that startling reality:

"I feel more than lucky but very blessed to be able to stand here 50 years later and to see the progress we have made,” Lewis said. “And just to see the changes have occurred. If someone had told me 50 years ago that an African-American would be in the White House as the president, I probably would have said 'You’re crazy. You are out of your mind. You don’t know what you’re talking about.' The country is a different country, and we’re better people.”

In fact, outstanding African-Americans have broken through doors previously closed to all people of color in the past 50 years.

In government, we have had two black Supreme Court Justices, several Cabinet secretaries, two governors, six senators and dozens of people in Congress. We have a black president twice elected by the Americans people – who, as many have noted, could have been owned by our first 16 presidents as property.

Top television shows, from “Oprah” to “The Cosby Show,” have had “cross-over” appeal that flies in the face of 50-year-old segregationist thinking.

Black, Hispanic, White and Asian people playing sports together is nothing radical today.

People of color, black and Hispanic, have won the Oscar, led major universities and taken charge of major companies, including American Express, Pepsi and Xerox.

To the people gathered in Washington 50 years ago that would have been one wild “Dream.”

Recall that the full name of the March was the “March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.” Jobs and economic equality were a central part of the dream.

Last week, the New York Times featured a series of charts. They compared statistics from 1963 to 2013. There is cause for optimism in the statistics. But make no mistake, if you are born poor and black in America in 2013 you still face a very tough road.

Still, back then the gap in the poverty rate between whites and blacks was 28 points. Today, it is only 13 points.

While nearly 45 percent of blacks were in substandard housing in 1962, that number has shrunk to less than 10 percent today.

Adjusted for inflation, the federal minimum wage would have been $9.54 in 1963. Today, it is a mere $7.25.

The unemployment rate in 1963 was 10 percent for blacks and 5 percent for whites. Today it is 14 percent for blacks and 7 percent for whites. As the Times notes, “Black unemployment has remained above 10 percent for a majority of the last five decades and is twice the rate for whites.”

One statistic – not included in the Times feature – was the out of wedlock birthrate. In 1962, the out of wedlock birth rate for blacks was about 20 percent. Over the last fifty years, it has risen to a tragic 72 percent.

These sobering statistics show that we still have a ways to go in fully achieving Dr. King’s Dream of equality.

The same can be said about the rate tragic rate of black-on-black crime.

I am reminded of the closing lines of Teddy Kennedy’s speech to the 1980 Democratic National Convention. Quoting the poet Alfred Lord Tennyson, Kennedy declared:

"I am a part of all that I have met/ [Tho] much is taken, much abides/ That which we are, we are -- One equal temper of heroic hearts/Strong in will/To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield."

He concluded: “For all those whose cares have been our concern, the work goes on, the cause endures, the hope still lives, and the dream shall never die.”

And so too, I hope for my sons (and, of course, my daughter) and their sons and all America’s children, that Dr. King’s dream never dies.





headline: As Syria strikes loom, Samantha Power's skills better suited to classroom than UN
byline: By Richard Grenell


U.S. academics and Upper East Side New Yorkers like to think of the United Nations as a place where foreign ambassadors have intellectual discussions about power and world peace. 

Our own president and his representative Samantha Power, too, have a long history of talking philosophically about war, genocide and the international legality of action in a crisis. 

While we all want the U.N. to live up to its original intent and be the place where the world comes together to solve international problems, the reality is the U.N. isn’t all that different from any other political body. Countries and individuals play to the cameras, create good theatre and negotiate selfishly. 

Ambassador Power has very little experience in multilateral diplomacy or political positioning. She has even less practice in negotiating on behalf of the United States. 

Her writings and previous work point to a long history of making highly intellectual arguments about what the world should look like. 

Too many members of the U.N. benefit from the status quo and won’t make decisions for purely altruistic reasons. Ambassador Power doesn’t understand this reality.  

She is better suited to convincing Harvard graduate students to write more about international problems. Her lack of experience sitting across the table from an experienced Russian diplomat could prove disastrous for the United States.

Take for instance the international concept of the “Responsibility to Protect.” At the U.N, the idea is abbreviated R2P and is regularly talked about by a small group of Non-governmental Organizations (NGO’s) who largely get funding from the U.N. or the United States to protect vulnerable citizens from brazen government dictators. 

Putting aside the criticism that those leading the discussion have a certain self-preservation charge to explain, R2P is nevertheless a worthy idea. No one really disagrees that all of humanity has a responsibility to protect fellow citizens in a time of need.

How and when the U.N. Security Council passes a resolution to actually protect people, however, is a decidedly political discussion steeped in self-aggrandizement. 

NGO leaders, who celebrated Power’s appointment as U.N. ambassador, have never understood the practicality of that decision or the motivations of those who may or may not vote for a resolution to protect the vulnerable. 

Too many members of the U.N. benefit from the status quo and won’t make decisions for purely altruistic reasons. Ambassador Power doesn’t understand this reality. 

Power’s speeches, thus far, put forward purely intellectual arguments that are ignored by the very people we need to support us. This elitist strategy won’t work inside the U.N.Her academic style is bound to fail. 

While the United States, Japan and a handful of others have pressed to reform the UN, others -- like Russia, China, South Africa and India -- are much more interested in adding new programs and studies that benefit their own economies or employ their own bureaucrats. Their entrenchment won’t be moved by an Ivy League white paper. 

U.N. representatives want more money for their problems and they want other people to pay for it. Think of it as the international version of the Democrats’ “Fair Share” argument. 

Launching a program or offering a resolution that doesn’t benefit Russia, for instance, has little chance of getting Russian support, unless, of course, a tough diplomat can demand a vote with a convincing argument and political pressure. 

Not unlike a legislator in our own Congress, horse-trading and the bully-pulpit are much more important skills than making a speech to an NGO conference.

Power’s background just doesn’t fit. And as the Syria situation unfolds at the Security Council, her abilities and inexperience are showing. Now is not the time to have someone on the job who is just learning how to be a tough negotiator. 

Power needs help if we are to get a U.N. resolution on Syria. President Obama should send a serious negotiator to assist Power immediately.





headline: Yes, GDP grew more than expected but US economic outlook remains treacherous
byline: By Peter Morici


GDP growth was revised up for the second quarter to 2.5 from 1.7 percent, because the trade deficit was much smaller than originally estimated and investments in inventory were revised upward.

The trade gap remains a substantial drag on economy and continued improvements will be needed to main stronger growth.

Continued slow growth in consumer spending indicates household balance sheets have not strengthened enough to instigate more robust growth in the second half.

Small businesses are expressing more optimism through sentiment surveys; however, they are not spending enough on new structures and capital goods to ignite stronger growth.

Many young people have no prospects for meaningful, permanent employment. They are saddled with student loans, continue to live with parents and postpone marriage.

Businesses of all sizes remain wary about ObamaCare mandates, more cumbersome and costly business regulations, and global economic and political conditions. Managers are inclined to squeeze more production out of existing facilities to meet moderately growing demand, and remain cautious about adding full time workers.

Since January, 936,000 more Americans report working part time, while only 27,000 more say they have obtained full-time employment. This shift places downward pressure on wages, which have increased less than one percent over the last six months.

Rising mortgage rates in anticipation that the Federal Reserve will scale purchases of mortgage back securities and longer-term Treasury debt (QE3) are slowing new home sales.

Overall, economists expect growth to continue at a somewhat stronger pace in the second half of 2013. But to see that expectation become a reality, it will require continued improvements in the trade deficit, stable oil prices, and for Congress and President Obama to reach an agreement to raise the debt ceiling in October with not too much drama.

The failure of House Republicans, Senate Democrats and President Obama to reach a compromise on fiscal year 2014 budget is less menacing.

A continuing resolution to maintain current outlays, subject to further spending cuts through sequestration, would slow the economy much less than a compromise budget. The latter would almost certainly entail higher taxes to appease the president, and the tax increases he obtained in January are already slowing growth and jobs creation.

Since mid 2009, growth has averaged a paltry 2.2 percent, whereas following a deeper recession the Reagan recovery produced 5 percent growth over a comparable time span.

Expectations of permanently slower growth are hardening disturbing changes in the structure of the labor market and social conditions. These days, new college graduates often work at unpaid internships while taking part-time jobs at places like Starbucks to meet minimal living expenses.

Many young people have no prospects for meaningful permanent employment, and saddled with burdensome education loans, continue to live with parents and postpone marriage into their late 20s and 30s.

All this slows new home new home construction, purchases of appliances and suppresses the birth rate. Let's face it, nothing drives consumer spending like babies, and we are simply not getting enough middle class births.

The Federal Reserve, by scaling back QE3 this fall, would exacerbate these conditions, but it may have little choice.

Historically low interests rates have inspired Wall Street speculators to rush to purchase homes, and created distortions in other asset markets, such as for agricultural land, and stocks bonds. Destructive bubbles could cause another deep recession.

The Fed is between a rock and hard place. Obama administration policies are decidedly anti growth—for example, the failure to confront China on the undervalued yuan; failure to approve more offshore drilling; failure to properly regulate banks, causing both loan shortages for good businesses and too many bad loans for questionable enterprises; health care policies that raise benefits costs and slow hiring; and regulatory overreach elsewhere that stifles manufacturing investment.

If the Fed slows bond purchases, it risks torpedoing a fragile recovery.

If it continues easy money policies, distortions in asset markets continue to grow, and new bubbles will threaten another financial crisis.





headline: Strikes against Syria long overdue
byline: By J.D. Gordon


In April of 2011 when Bashir Al-Assad’s body count stood at just 200, I wrote on these pages that as a long-term bitter U.S. enemy, Syria is the Arab Spring’s ‘silver lining,’ and questioned why the Obama administration wasn’t doing more to support democracy there.

After all, President Barack Obama threw his full weight behind similar pro-democracy protests in Tunisia and Egypt, toppling long term allied governments, while launching “kinetic military action” in Libya, ousting a dictator who hadn’t posed a threat to U.S. interests in nearly a decade.

Islamist regimes hostile to U.S. interests wasted little time in taking power, contributing to the chaos that led to the Benghazi disaster and Egypt’s continued descent into the abyss.

Now well over two years and 100,000 deaths later, it finally appears that Team Obama will get off the sidelines and into the game in Syria. And it’s long overdue.

Four U.S. Navy destroyers equipped with cruise missiles are on station in the Eastern Mediterranean, and aircraft carriers USS Harry S. Truman and USS Nimitz are deployed to the region.

Once we attack a ruthless dictator with deep terror ties, we cannot allow him to remain in power to seek revenge.

Though their firepower can damage Syria’s military as punishment for the chemical weapons strike last week killing over 300 civilians which violated President Obama’s “red line.” But just as we saw in Libya, real regime change in Syria would require a much larger, sustained campaign.

Yet by going to war, regime change will be exactly what we need.

Let’s recall the airstrike in 1986 against Libya’s Muammar Qaddafi in retaliation for the Berlin disco bombing targeting U.S. soldiers.

How did he repay us?

In 1988 Libyan agents downed Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 270 people.

Let’s also recall chasing Iraqi forces out of Kuwait in 1991, only to leave Saddam Hussein in power. We later came to regret that decision as well.

Once we attack a ruthless dictator with deep terror ties, we cannot allow him to remain in power to seek revenge. Ignoring the danger Al-Assad poses through Hezbollah, a terror proxy for Syria and Iran based in Lebanon but with a worldwide strike capability including throughout the Americas, imperils us all.

As for U.N. approval, since Russia and China have blocked military action against Syria since Day 1, any U.S. strike would have be via a “coalition of the willing,” reminiscent of the tough decisions faced by President George W. Bush in 2003. Decisions so casually dismissed by then-Illinois State Sen. Obama.

And while it’s true that Syria’s Sunni-dominated opposition includes elements of Al Qaeda, the Muslim Brotherhood and other radical Islamists, at least there is a glimmer of hope that given the right level of U.S. and allied attention, a replacement government will be less hostile to the U.S., Europe and Israel than Al-Assad has been.

It’s hard to get any worse.

The minority Alawite-dominated Syrian regime still has American blood on its hands for the 1983 Marine Barracks bombing in neighboring Beirut, killing 241 U.S. and 58 French service members, while Bashar’s father Hafez Al-Assad ruled Damascus.

It’s still a state supporter of terrorism that funds and supplies Hezbollah, and serves as Iran’s top ally. Regime change will weaken both Hezbollah and Iran, two of the world’s most destabilizing forces.

And as for the 100,000 already killed in Syria and once low level demonstrations that slowly morphed into a jihadist-infested civil war, President Obama can only ask himself why he didn’t get involved to stop it earlier.





headline: How can we get our politicians to talk like Ashton Kutcher?
byline: By Cal Thomas


Ashton Kutcher, the 35-year-old actor and ex-husband of actress Demi Moore, has never been considered a poster child for the "family values crowd," but at the Teen Choice Awards two weeks ago, he could have easily passed for one.

Following screams from young female fans in the audience, Kutcher silenced them with a motivational message that bordered on inspiration. He told them: "I believe that opportunity looks a lot like hard work. ... I've never had a job in my life that I was better than. I was always just lucky to have a job. And every job I had was a steppingstone to my next job, and I never quit my job until I had my next job."

Kutcher wasn't through: "The sexiest thing in the entire world is being really smart and being thoughtful and being generous. Everything else is c--p ... that people try to sell to you to make you feel like less. So don't buy it. Be smart, be thoughtful and be generous."

The road to success remains what it has always been: hard work, believing in yourself, never taking "no" as the final answer and making right moral choices.

That such remarks would gain so much attention is indicative of where we are as a nation. One way to take the cultural temperature is to observe how ancient wisdom suddenly sounds new, even radical. Not many Millennials are hearing this message. Maybe some get it from their parents, but many teens and young adults don't discover such wisdom until they are parents, if then.

For older adults, Kutcher's remarks are so obvious that when they were teens they would have been unremarkable and nearly universally believed, if not always practiced. They resonate today because of the dire condition of the nation's economy and because of moral libertarianism -- whatever feels good goes; whatever works for the individual is right, even if the good of society suffers. More and more people seem to be looking for a lifeline. Kutcher threw them one.

Radio host Rush Limbaugh said of many of today's young people: "There is a fog of depression ... There's pessimism ... and it's because they do not think there's any prosperity left for them. ... They don't think there's any money to be earned; it's all gone. Their parents' and grandparents' generation were the last ones that really had it made. And they're certainly not hearing this kind of message from anybody in politics that they vote for."

Kutcher has described himself as "a fiscally conservative, socially liberal independent." He supports gay rights and same-sex marriage. Though raised a Roman Catholic in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, he has dabbled in Kabbalah, a form of Jewish mysticism. No one can typecast him as a soldier for religious conservatism. He is a supporter of President Obama, but doesn't like his health care plan.

The road to success remains what it has always been: hard work, believing in yourself, never taking "no" as the final answer and making right moral choices. These have been proven throughout history to better any life and improve even the worst of circumstances.

If we know such things to be true, why are they not taught and modeled in today's culture? For many, it could lead to less reliance on government. Politicians would become less necessary. If such principles were again taught in our public schools, someone might sue for imposing someone's "moral values" on others.

Envy, greed and entitlement are the unholy trinity of failure. What Kutcher offers young people is the opposite, leading to success, self-realization and independence.

Here's one more Kutcherism: "Everything around us that we call life was made up by people that are no smarter than you. And you can build your own things. You can build your own life that other people can live in. So build a life. Don't live one, build one."

If only Washington politicians would think and talk this way.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: America's kids need football now more than ever
byline: By Daniel J. Flynn


A million teenagers right now participate in America’s largest extracurricular fitness program for high school students. They run and wrestle, do push-ups and sit-ups, and challenge themselves beyond their perceived limits. And then they do it all over again the next day.

The rigorous activity is exactly what the United States of Obesity needs. It’s also what an increasing number of voices call to restrict.

Football is the most popular high school sport in terms of participants and spectators. It’s also the most controversial.

Coming off a season in which school board members sought to ban the sport, state legislators introduced bills to limit contact in practices, and high school participation declined for the first time in almost two decades, football seeks to regain its footing this season.

For football to burst out of its three point stance in 2013, instead of getting knocked on its behind like last year, will require a more forceful recitation of the facts to calm the frenzy.

Not a single sandlot, high school, or college player died from a football hit last season. A half century ago, collisions regularly killed two-to-three-dozen players every year.

Not a single sandlot, high school, or college player died from a football hit last season. A half century ago, collisions regularly killed two-to-three-dozen players every year. Our boys’ game plays much safer than our dads’ one did. 

The media remains transfixed on head injuries. But players’ bellies and not their brains ought to worry the public most.

To the extent that the game remains a deadly one for youngsters, it’s generally the likes of heat stroke and enlarged hearts, not collisions, which kill. Obesity appears as a too-common denominator in such deaths on the gridiron.

Last season, a 320-pound high school senior collapsed on a South Carolina field during a homecoming game, dying from an enlarged heart.

In August 2009, high-blood pressure killed a 360-pound thirteen-year-old who fell to the ground while running laps during practice.

In 2010, a five-foot-eight, 300-pound high school player collapsed and died during warm-ups. Linebackers may appear more ominous than lunchboxes. But it’s the latter rather than the former that kill young athletes.

Football isn’t the cause of these tragedies. It potentially can be a cure. Double sessions, two-a-days, hell week—whatever you call those ten painful pre-season practices crammed into five days -- challenge young bodies in a way that our soft, sedentary society rarely does.

When I shadowed a high school player in Massachusetts last season, I discovered that -- because nobody walks during practice -- he ran nearly a mile just moving to the water fountain, to drills, back to the huddle, etc., independent of the organized practice activity. The movements we consider rigorous, they consider rest.

Whereas obesity afflicted one in twenty teenagers fifty years ago, it burdens almost one in five today. Kids need more sports, not less.

Basketball, soccer, hockey, lacrosse, and yes, football, provide something that video games do not. The gridiron, because of the advantages it gives to bulk and brawn, can play an especially constructive role getting bigger kids off the couch and into cleats.

Of course, every human activity carries risk.

August’s on-ice death of a sixteen-year-old Canadian hockey prospect and July’s death of an eight-year-old hit by a ball during baseball practice highlight the dangers of otherwise beneficial pastimes. But the most dangerous activity for children is inactivity. 

The misplaced emphasis on the roughness of football isn’t just wrong. It is decades late.

The concern doesn’t reflect the sport played in 2013. The ancient game inherits a modern problem: widespread obesity. That, rather than head injuries, primarily threatens players.

America doesn’t have a football problem. Football has an all-too American problem.





headline: If America wants Assad to respect international law, it must respect it, too
byline: By Rep. Raul Grijalva, Michael Shank


Now that President Obama has made up his mind about taking America to war with yet another Muslim country, he wants Congress to get on board.

To his credit, he’s seeking congressional authorization, as required by the War Powers Act of 1973, but he has given every indication that he’ll invade Syria irrespective of approval by majorities in the House and the Senate.

Presidents have done it before, without congressional authorization, from Harry Truman to Ronald Reagan to Bill Clinton.

This would be a shame. Not only would it mean that the U.S. would be flouting, somewhat ostentatiously, international law, but it would also mean that this would be the eighth Muslim-majority country with which America has been at war during Obama’s term as president. Count them: Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen, Mali, Libya, Somalia, and now Syria.

Syria would be the eighth Muslim-majority country with which America has been at war during Obama’s term as president. Count them: Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen, Mali, Libya, Somalia, and now Syria.

This weekend, the White House came courting to Congress, showing evidence and secret intelligence to make the case for military action. What was remarkably lacking, however, throughout all the pomp and circumstance, was any other tool in their intervention toolkit.

No talk about exhaustive diplomacy with all stakeholders involved.

No talk about violence prevention.

No talk about the International Criminal Court.

No talk about working with the U.N. Security Council. In fact, quite the opposite: as evidenced by Secretary Kerry’s speech on Friday and Obama’s speech on Saturday, an implicit dismissal of all of these options. In fact, Kerry directly dismissed the U.N.’s role and its Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon, as did the president.

This is unprecedented, especially for a Democratic White House. This also puts the president’s main argument – that the violation of international law, vis-à-vis chemical weapons usage, is the main pretext for invasion – in a precarious position.

Why, because the president, unless he gets clearance from the U.N. Security Council before/after he gets clearance (or not) from members of Congress, will also be in direct violation of international law.

That means that our president is going to war with another country’s president for violating international law while our president is fully prepared to violate international law. How’s that for international norm setting and standard bearing?

America must remember that, at present, there is no international legal justification for an attack on Syria.

America would need a United Nations Security Council resolution, backing the invasion, which it has yet to secure.

This is a clear double-standard and one that erodes the ethical fabric forged in 1945, within the United Nations Charter, and before, in the Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928.

America should care about international law and justice, and we should use all necessary measures and mechanisms in place for such legal enforcement, to hold Assad – and possibly some of the rebel groups --accountable for crimes against humanity and war crimes.

We agree that there is no excuse for President Assad’s actions. If the Assad government is responsible for the hundreds dead from last week’s chemical weapons use, Assad will have violated international laws like the 1925 Geneva protocol prohibiting the use of biological and chemical weapons.

That still doesn’t allow America, or the UK, or France, to invade the country.

Syria’s lack of involvement, as a state party, in the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention and the 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention, also does not justify military intervention by the West.

No matter how egregious the violation, America must still work within the legal frameworks at the United Nations Security Council, lest we undermine them further by flouting their very existence. Failure to do so would not be a good legal precedent for an American president to set.

Secretary Kerry once agreed with this thinking, reaffirming, during his confirmation hearings in January 2013, “a U.N. resolution is a necessary ingredient to provide the legal basis for military action in an emergency”.

And while this crisis in Syria is undoubtedly an emergency, in light of the concern that the Assad government used chemical weapons on his people, we have had plenty of time – and tens of thousands of deaths – to make the legal case to the U.N. Security Council and to the US Congress, something the Obama administration has failed to do.

If the administration wants to avoid undermining almost a century of international law, and four decades of Congressional legislation, President Obama, Secretary Kerry, and Ambassador Samantha Power are going to have to make the case to Congress and to the Security Council.

America, that is the hard work that is necessary. There is no excuse for a half-baked case and there is no excuse for claims of urgency when tens of thousands of Syrians have already died with little fanfare in Washington.

If America wants the Assad government – or any other government for that matter – to obey by the strictures of international law, the West must set the standard for responsible adherence.

Invading Syria now not only fails on that front but also further undermines the West’s ability to forge agreement around this entire premise. And what a crime that would constitute.



Democrat Raul Grijalva represents Arizona's 3rd congressional district in the U.S. House of Representatives. He is the co-chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus.





headline: Barack Obama -- our irrelevant president
byline: By Michael Goodwin


The calendar says President Obama has over three years left in the White House, but he is already irrelevant in much of the world. From Russia to China to Egypt, Iran and Syria, allies and adversaries alike are tuning him out. They regard both his threats and his promises as hollow.

Support at home is shrinking, too. Gallup says approval for his handling of the economy sank to 35 percent and ObamaCare grows ever more unpopular.

He still can count on his party’s control of the Senate, but next year’s election could change that.

No wonder the first family got a second dog. Every president needs a friend and Bo probably got tired of him, too.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Scientific breakthroughs vs. your privacy -- lessons from Henrietta Lacks' saga
byline: By Dr. Marc Siegel


When Henrietta Lacks died of cervical cancer at Johns Hopkins hospital in 1951, her cancer cells continued to grow outside her body, the first successful human clone. These cells, known as “HELA cells,” went on to become the most useful cells in the history of science, leading to cancer cures, treatments for HIV and parkinsonism, advances in vitro fertilization, and lifesaving vaccines for polio and influenza. They were even studied in outer space, and were used in over 74,000 scientific publications.

But all this groundbreaking work proceeded without any consent or involvement of the Lacks family.

An eye-opening and extremely popular book, “The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks,” by Rebecca Skloot, first brought this injustice to public attention in 2010. The Henrietta Lacks case added to our sordid history in America of experimentation without consent on the poor and African-Americans.

Our own specific genetic signatures could become public knowledge without our permission.

Since then, HELA cells have become the first cells to be genetically sequenced and mapped. This advance is already proving extremely important, as it has led to research revealing how the Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) attaches to cells and converts them to malignant, rapidly growing cells. This finding will likely lead to exciting new cancer cures.

When the Lacks family became aware that Henrietta’s genetic map was being made public and published by scientists on the Internet – including revelations about some genes they themselves had inherited -- they met with the National Institutes of Health to see if they could finally gain some control over Henrietta’s cells and genes.

The Lacks’ concerns are some of the same concerns we may all soon face as our cells are genetically mapped. Our own specific genetic signatures could become public knowledge without our permission.

"We’ve got to maintain some kind of control over the information that's out there because we don't know what damage it could do,” David Lacks Jr., Henrietta’s grandson pointed out to me in an interview. “Nobody's concerned about privacy until the lack of privacy comes back and burns you.”

The National Institutes of Health brokered a deal with the Lacks family earlier this month which will allow them to have a say in how the important cells are used going forward.

Dr. Francis Collins, Director of the National Institutes of Health and a former head of the Human Genome Project, believes that here in America we are much more sensitive to personal rights than we were 62 years ago and that this important step in maintaining personal rights can be done without slowing the wheels of science.

Collins told me in an interview, “Here at NIH we have been deliberating for quite a few years about what's the appropriate way to balance two compelling principles, namely [that] individuals should have the opportunity to decide how their own biological specimens are going to be used and what privacy protection they need -- that is one principle, and the other is that science advances for public benefit [can take place] more quickly if data is accessible and you don't put up unnecessary barriers.”

What will this mean for the rest of us? Collins believes that each case is different but that the Lacks case sets an important precedent for the rest of us in terms of controlling our genes and where our personal information is published.

Says author Rebecca Skloot, who also spoke with me in an interview, “Some people feel their soul is in these cells. It’s a very personal thing and it gets to the thing of where does life begin. Some people…don’t really care [and think] “I'm not using the cells.” But people want to know, they want to be asked for permission, they don't want to find out after the fact that their cells are being used for research.”

As medical genetics becomes more personalized, there will be a continued conflict between the needs of science and our own need for control of our DNA. This conflict can lead to exploitation, as the Henrietta Lacks case demonstrates. But as the Lacks case also shows, solutions can also be found which benefit both essential principles without sacrificing our basic human rights.





headline: Five leadership lessons on Syria and military power for Commander-in-Chief Obama
byline: By James Jay Carafano


President Obama's Saturday speech on Syria (where he decided not to decide) offers at least five fine examples of how not to employ military power.

Consulting with Congress is, of course, exactly the right step to take before committing both U.S. armed forces and the American people to ventures overseas. But, how the president got to this point is a lesson in lousy leadership.

Lesson #1: Surprise is Still a Principle of War. If the president's priority was really to punish Assad with shock and awe, he went about it all wrong. The regime has had plenty of time to get ready--disperse assets; marshal its allies; deploy human shields; and decide how it will respond or preempt US action.

Lesson #2. Red Lines Only Work When They Are Red. The whole idea of a red line is prevent bad behavior by declaring if the line is crossed there will be swift and decisive action.

If President Obama was really serious about holding Assad accountable he should have consulted Congress before he issued a red line--not after. 

If President Obama was really serious about holding Assad accountable he should have consulted Congress before he issued a red line--not after.

In all likelihood he didn't because there was a good chance they would have said--no--and well they might.

Intervening in civil wars; getting conclusive evidence about what is going on the ground; and defining clear, achievable, realistic military objectives for punitive strikes is really hard--and the White House had no good answers for addressing any of these issues.

What happens to Obama's next red line, if Congress rejects this one?

Or will Congress have to rubber stamp a stupid red line to preserve the president's credibility? Wouldn't that just encourage Obama to make more reckless red lines in the future?

Did the White House think about any of these questions before it stated making declarations?

Lesson #3. A Shot Across the Bow Only Works if the Enemy Thinks You Are Serious About Sinking Their Ship. President Obama has already declared he won't intervene in the civil war, so any strikes will be little more than a nuisance to a regime that plans to fight to the bitter end.

Lesson #4. Victory Has a Thousand Fathers, Defeat is an Orphan. President George W. Bush had a Congressional authorization for a use of force in Iraq, a UN resolution, popular support for military interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan, and support of a broad international coalition. That mattered little when the wars did not go well.

All the legitimacy in the world will mean nothing--if military action does not turn out well. The president doesn't have a solid game plane for Syria, a resolution from Congress is not a "get out of jail free card."

Lesson #5. Think Before You Act. In terms of salvaging the president's shattered credibility as a foreign policy leader turning to Congress won't help.

A wise president would have built a coalition of support before the crisis--not waited for the crisis--then tried to build a coalition. And, failing that, then make it seem like military action is all up to Congress--and the president is just a bystander.

From Obama's perspective, turning to Congress now may seem like a brilliant move. If Congress votes no, he has shown he has empathy with the international community--and he is still a good guy. If Congress votes yes--and it all turns out badly--he will say we are all in this together.

But from the standpoint of acting like the world's leader this may be the nadir of American power.

The reality is that every decision on how to employ the armed forces has turned out badly for Obama.

He ran away from Iraq--the violence there is worse now than when he came into office.

He wants to go to "zero" in Afghanistan. The Taliban can't wait for that.

He led from behind in Libya and that failure became a front page story after Benghazi. 

Moscow mocks him.

Beijing ignores him.

All these acts as president show Obama has not learned his lessons very well. The Saturday speech just makes his shortfalls as commander-in-chief even more glaringly apparent.





headline: Mr. President, ObamaCare is creating a part time economy
byline: By Rep. Sam Graves


President Obama’s recent pivot yet again to the economy has caused Americans to wonder why we remain in an economic rut.

Although there are signs of improvement, why is our country's growth so sluggish and unemployment rate still high?

A closer look at the June jobs numbers reveals a grave problem that is flying somewhat under the radar. And Friday’s unemployment announcement will most likely reveal the same problem.

Seven to eight percent unemployment, 14 percent under-employment, and a part-time economy should not – and cannot – be tolerated as the new normal in a nation as great as ours.

The June unemployment rate remained unchanged from the previous month at 7.6 percent, but the June underemployment rate, which includes those who have stopped looking or settled for part-time work, rose sharply from 13.8 percent to 14.3 percent.

This is partly due to the transition of employment from full-time to part-time, as the private and public sectors are forced into the perilous compliance standards of the president’s health care law.

Small businesses are a primary creator of jobs and the employer of half of all private sector employees. So, when analyzing this new part-time pattern, a look at the small business role in this trend is in order.

By and large, small companies don’t want to settle for part-time employees over full-time positions. But for many, hiring part-time employees is simply their only solution for staying in business.

The health care law forces businesses to offer health insurance to full-time workers. Surprisingly, the law defines full-time as just 30 hours a week or more. Contrast this with the fact that the average American non-farm worker puts in just over 35 hours a week.

Therefore, to remain viable, many companies and governments, like the state of Virginia for example, have been forced to cap part-timers’ hours in anticipation of the mandate.

While the administration recently delayed this requirement for one year until January 2015, many organizations had already adjusted their operations before the announcement of the delay, and some organizations are choosing to make workforce changes now rather than delay the inevitable.

Consider what small business owners have told the Small Business Committee. William J. Gouldin, Jr., president of a floral company in Richmond, Virginia, testified during an April hearing on how small businesses were complying with the health care law.

Mr. Gouldin articulated the law’s conundrum for small businesses accurately when he said:

“Every employer will be forced to define part-time employment as something below 30 hours per week and most will use between 20 and 27.5 hours per week. There are millions of people who currently work between 30 and 36 hours per week because that works for their lifestyle and income needs. …The fixed cost of health insurance premiums is already so high that many employers will pay the penalty of ‘time and a half’ because it is less than the marginal cost of health insurance per hour for an additional employee.”

At another hearing, Brian Vaughn, president of Nearly Famous, Inc. in Douglas, Georgia said:

“Prior to the law’s enactment – my goal had always been to hire fewer people for more hours. It is easier to retain employees that work full time. However, now that the law has passed, I have to consider options other than what makes practical business sense.

Now, because of what Washington has mandated, it seems to make more practical business sense for me to hire more people for fewer hours.

At a time when millions of Americans are out of work, is this really the right incentive? This is not what I want and it is not what is best for my employees, but in order to survive and be able to pay the employees that I have, it is what I will have to do.”

Their concerns are bolstered by data seen in recent polls and surveys of American entrepreneurs. A recent U.S. Chamber of Commerce small business survey found that among small businesses that will be subject to the employer mandate, one-half say they will cut hours to avoid the penalties.

It’s good news if the president is returning his focus to the economy. But Congressional Republicans never lost that focus. We have been fighting for solutions that will spur economic growth and create jobs for all Americans because we have been listening to what small business owners and employees have been telling us all along.

That’s why I have cosponsored common sense legislation by Rep. Todd Young, of Indiana, to redefine a full time employee as a worker who averages at least 40 hours a week.

Seven to eight percent unemployment, 14 percent underemployment, and a part-time economy should not – and cannot – be tolerated as the new normal in a nation as great as ours. Removing government-created obstacles to small business growth is what Washington should be addressing, and this focus should start with removing the herculean impediments to job creation found in the health care law.





headline: Soul Food: They called him a dreamer
byline: By Kelly Wright


People called him a dreamer, a man of vision who believed that we all could someday sit together at the table of brotherhood and become what he called, “a beloved community.”

Next Wednesday, the world will let freedom ring for the dream of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. On August 28, 1963, Dr. King stepped onto the world stage from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial to declare to people of every race, creed and color: “I Have a Dream.”

Highly acclaimed motivational speaker and preacher Willie Jolley recently asked me rhetorically:

"What would have happened if Martin Luther King hadn't stood on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial and said that 'I Have a Dream.' Not have a wish. You know, I didn't have a positive feeling. I have a dream! You've got to have a dream. It's not a nicety, it's a necessity.”

I concur with Jolley. Dreams, no matter how impossible they appear to be, are a necessity.

Scripture tells us that God often spoke to people through dreams. In the book of Numbers 12:6 we read: "When a prophet of the LORD is among you, I reveal myself to him in visions, I speak to him in dreams."

Was Dr. King a prophet? Some believe he was indeed a man who spoke prophetically for the times in which he lived. He set the stage for change through the power of a dream.

He grew up during some incredibly turbulent years for America. The racial tensions were exacerbated by segregation. He talked about how blacks were marginalized, restricted to live in ghettos and not allowed to move into more affluent and white-only neighborhoods. 

These were troubling times. Acts of hostility inflicted on people during those turbulent years were cruel and despicable. Some black men would hang from trees like some strange fruit as the victims of white lynch mobs. So much hatred, and so little love. It seems love had become a four-letter word seldom if ever used.

This is only part of what Dr. King had to contend with on that day when he stepped forward to declare his dream. He said his dream was deeply rooted in the American Dream and he eloquently wove the dream into the matrix of one of our founding documents, The Declaration of Independence: “the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness,” and “we hold these truths to be self evident that all men are created equal.”

Fifty years later, King’s dream is still very much alive. Undoubtedly, there are many challenges to overcome, but he would applaud the significant gains that have been made. He would applaud the nation’s accomplishments.

Also, he would challenge us to deal with matters involving poverty, war and injustice. He would seek to inspire us to pray for God’s plan for building a more perfect union.

On the campus of Morehouse College in Atlanta, where King completed his undergraduate degree, students are reminded of King's dream and legacy. They fully understand King's belief that faith and education is part of fulfilling the dream.

King believed higher learning was a vital tool for escaping the snare of poverty. Former president of Morehouse, Dr. Robert Franklin talked to me about the impact of King's dream on the students and the nation.

"We hope that every man of Morehouse who graduates will take with him those virtues that we seek to instill: a commitment to academic excellence, community service and ethical leadership," he said.

“Service,” Franklin told me, “is the price we pay for the space we occupy on this earth. It’s the foundation for rebuilding and renewing families, houses of worship, schools, and other organizations that will change the future prospects of our nation, community by community.”

King’s dream embodies forgiveness, another critical element that is often overlooked in today’s era of cynicism. Popular pastor Bishop TD Jakes of the Potter’s House in Dallas talked to me about King’s example of love and forgiveness.

"Look at Dr. King or countless others of that ilk who have done extraordinary feats because they conserve their energy for its highest and best use," he said. "And in this climate that we're living in, the death of all civility, sometimes I have to recognize that forgiveness is the best path to take for long-term success.”

King, the dreamer, envisioned an America where all of God’s children, regardless of their color, would develop a faith that would enable them to stand against injustice, fight bigotry and poverty and redeem America through praying together, working together, struggling together, and eventually developing freedom together.

It requires forgiveness first between God and man, and then man-to-man.”

In the Lord’s Prayer, Jesus says “forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.” With this faith, we come to a place where we forgive each other of our offenses. Failure to forgive leads to bitterness and hatred. Bitterness kills, forgiveness heals.

We cannot feel the fullness of King’s dream if our hearts are hardened by the bitter root of hate. To achieve the dream, King said; “We must learn to live together as brothers or perish together as fools.”

They called him a dreamer. Let us strive to keep the dream alive! 





headline: Secretary Kerry, Mr. Obama, emotions may win arguments, but they don't win wars
byline: By K.T. McFarland


Secretary Kerry laid out a compelling case Friday that the Syrian government did use chemical weapons on innocent civilians. It was emotional and powerful.

Kerry also laid out a strong case that President Assad should not be allowed to get away with it -- for the sake of Syrians and for the sake of the world. 

Finally, Kerry argued that others are watching and, if we fail to stop Assad, they will be left with the message that no one will stop them should they decide to use weapons of mass destruction.

But Kerry did not say what we are supposed to do about it.

It is important not to let emotions get in the way of cold, hard, calculated military planning.

It is important not to let emotions get in the way of cold, hard, calculated military planning.

Emotions may win arguments, but they don't win wars. Wars are won by clearly stating military and diplomatic objectives, committing the resources required to achieve those objectives, and not stopping until those objectives are achieved.

What are the president's goals in using military force? To punish Assad? To deter Assad from using chemical weapons again? To telegraph to others that they will be punished similarly should they try to use these weapons?

If Obama's goal is punish Assad, then a limited strike against some of his war-making capacity is more of a military spanking that serious punishment. President Obama has made it clear we will not send troops into Syria, nor try to topple Assad from power. But unless our punishment fits the crime, Assad will conclude he has gotten away with it at a price, but a price worth paying. 

If Obama's goal is to deter Assad, then what happens if our military action does not stop him, and he uses chemical weapons again? With all the caveats and limitations the president and his top officials have put on our military response, it is unlikely an American attack would destroy the chemical weapons themselves. 

So what if Assad once again calls the president's bluff, as he did with the red line threat, and uses his remaining chemical weapons next week or next month?

Would Obama then be willing to escalate the fighting, as President Johnson did during the Vietnam War? If not, then Syria, Iran and others will conclude that while America may talk tough, we will go only so far in carrying out our threats, and no further. 

Like a poker player, what if the Assad sees our bet and raise it? The British, Germans, and probably the Turks and French were in this poker game to start, but now seem to have dropped out. Will Obama do so too?

In foreign policy the only thing worse than not doing something, is doing something that fails or makes the situation worse.. Even U.S. military leaders, including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, have spoken publicly and privately that they see enormous problems if the U.S. takes military action against Syria. Our limited actions are unlikely to deter Assad or anyone else.

Indeed, they might encourage greater carnage.

So, while I'm moved by Secretary Kerry's eloquent statement, I'm not sold on military action unless someone can tell me what the president's military objectives are, how the forces he plans to commit will achieve those objectives, and what we can with confidence anticipate as the endgame of U.S. military action in Syria.





headline: Obama’s hesitation on Syria threatens U.S. prosperity
byline: By Peter Morici


President Obama’s vacillation on Syria -- first delaying military action and then booting the decision to Congress-- poses grave threats to U.S. prosperity.

Imminent military action, especially in the Middle East, encourages fears of shortages and panic in oil markets.

Two years ago, oil prices jumped to more than $110 in anticipation of the U.S. action in Libya but then subsided when the worst did not happen to oil supplies.

With mounting evidence that Syria used chemical weapons, oil prices have again jumped, and a prolonged debate in Congress could push gasoline above $4.00. That would dent Detroit’s resurgent auto sales, shelve investment decisions across manufacturing, and weigh on already flagging new home sales.

Had Obama acted quickly on his own, or at least called Congress back into session immediately, the period of uncertainty would have been cut from at least a month to one week.

Should the Congress approve military force, Iran could attack Israel or cut back on oil production, permanently pushing up prices. However, once U.S. strikes begin, if those consequences don’t materialize, oil prices should fall back.

The president exacerbated near term fears by first vacillating after Syrian President Assad crossed his red line, and then asking Congress to vote on military action during the week of September 9.

Had Obama acted quickly on his own, or at least called Congress back into session immediately, the period of uncertainty would have been cut from at least a month to one week.

Extended uncertainty can wreck havoc on investment and consumer spending, and potentially tank the economy.

The president faces formidable opposition among Congressional liberals and the Tea Party, who don’t grasp what is at stake for U.S. security and economic interests.

Since Roosevelt, the United States has carefully promoted a system of international law that prohibits aggression, protects human rights, and promotes freer markets for international trade and investment.

The Chemical Weapons Convention, which 188 nations have signed, clearly prohibits Assad’s egregious conduct. Sadly, the British Parliament has abdicated its responsibilities by voting against UK military action, and the Germans and Japanese are hardly supportive.

Russia and China, two countries that abide only by international rules only when they suit their convenience, have blocked action at the Security Council.

Among nations with significant military power, or at least the financial resources to back it, America, France and perhaps a few others stand alone.

The liberals and Tea Party, who are very reluctant to support military force unless U.S. security is directly threatened, should consider the longer-term consequences of U.S. inaction on the economy and jobs.

With the United States, China, Japan and Germany account for about half the global economy and the latter already view the United States as a weak and fading power. By history and design, none has much use for the rules of commerce established by the WTO and similar institutions, and have acted with considerable impunity.

For example, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic recovery program hinges on purposefully undervaluing the yen to pump up exports and steal jobs in the U.S. automotive sector and elsewhere in U.S. manufacturing.

Chinese and German commercial policies victimize smaller nations -- consider what Angela Merkel’s austerity policies are doing to Greece and Portugal to keep Germany’s export machine going -- and destroy American jobs . After all, China’s undervalued yuan and naked protectionism stole the solar panel industry from U.S. manufacturers.

They behave so badly, despite U.S. protestations, because from Obama is viewed as weak and naïve.

By leading from behind internationally and failing to act forcefully against protectionism that harms American workers, he has emboldened those nations’ to give lip service to international rules and then do whatever they please.

Meanwhile, the U.S. recovery drags along at a paltry 2 percent, while China's economy grows at 7.5 percent, and Japan and Germany recover.

If the liberals and Tea Party block U.S. military action against Syria, that vote will mark the end of the United States of America as a prosperous nation with the resolve to lead.





headline: The truth about Obama's new executive orders targeting guns
byline: By John Lott


It sure sounds scary. "Military weapons" being reimported back into the United States. Or people getting guns without background checks. But the reception being given President Obama's two new executive orders on guns largely relies on ignorance of how the current rules work.

The president's executive order banning the reimportation of quotmilitary weaponsquot really only affects old M-1 Garand 30-06 rifles. These rifles have been used in the Civilian Marksmanship Program program and are mainly purchased by collectors. At one time they were quotmilitary weapons,quot but they were used in World War II and the Korean War.

No other US-made military rifles are being imported. And, more importantly, this semi-automatic rifle is functionally no different than any semi-automatic deer hunting. They fire the same bullets at the same rapidity and do the same damage as other deer hunting rifles.

The only difference is that these old Garands tend to be relatively heavy -- in the past 60 years, manufacturers have learned how to make lighter versions of these guns.

The reception being given President Obama's two new executive orders on guns largely relies on ignorance of how the current rules work.

Despite the scary rhetoric, the White House is leaving out one important point: it isn't pointing to any cases where imported U.S.-made military weapons have been used in a crime. And the reason is obvious: there probably aren't any.

Regarding the second executive order, the only quotcorporatequot registration is for Class III (machine guns) weapons. Again, the Obama administration doesn't provide examples of people using a corporation to register handguns or semi-automatic rifles as a way to bypass criminal background checks.

More importantly, it fails to point to any cases where such guns have been used in crimes. Corporations are used (primarily) to obtain fully-automatic machine guns, as they are usually out of the price range of most citizens (running at least about $20,000 each).

Yes, when registered to a corporation any officer is allowed to posses the machine gun, but the point that the transfer occurs still requires a NICS check for the person actually picking up the gun.

What happens under current law is that if a gun is registered to a corporation, then anyone who is an officer in the corporation would be allowed to use the gun.

As with many actions these days by the Obama administration, the president doesn't have the authority to rewrite the current rules. Changing these rules for corporations requires congressional action.

Of course, all this is typical for our president, with Obama in the past making such completely false claims as “as many as 40 percent of all gun purchases take place without a background check.quot

But how many times can the president cry wolf without losing all credibility?





headline: Obama has only himself to blame for Britain’s Syria snub
byline: By Adam Shaw


The Obama administration is today still reeling from Thursday’s enormous setback to the Syria intervention effort, as the UK voted to reject military intervention in the war-torn nation.

It is difficult to overestimate just how devastating this is to the President’s foreign policy.

Britain has stood side by side with America in almost every post-war conflict. The one major exception was the Vietnam War, arguably America’s biggest ever defeat. Put simply, America wins when it goes in with Britain, it loses when it does not. And Britain almost always stands shoulder to shoulder with its strongest ally.

So what happened? The Obama administration must be scratching their heads in wonder at how such a seemingly easy vote could go disastrously wrong. A relatively popular UK Prime Minister leading a Conservative Party that voted both for Afghanistan and Iraq, who seems to be on good terms with President Obama, facing off against a weak, divided left-wing opposition. To use an Americanism, it should have been a slam-dunk.

Additionally, unlike Iraq, where the evidence was highly contentious, it seems fairly reasonable to conclude Bashar Assad has attacked his people with chemical weapons. So why did the House of Commons say “nay” not “aye”?

To see this no vote as just about Syria does not fully explain the mentality in the UK. Instead, we must look at the state of the Anglo-American alliance. For most interventions do not directly serve British interests, but American. Britain therefore goes into battle because America is Britain’s strongest ally, and a strong America means a strong Great Britain.

For instance, although Britain recognized that Al-Qaeda posed a serious threat to the UK, we intervened in Afghanistan because, as Tony Blair succinctly stated at the time, an attack on America was seen as an attack on Britain, such was the strength of the Special Relationship.

With Iraq throughout the nineties and in 2003, America decided Hussein needed dealing with, Britain stepped up. When Clinton expressed broader foreign policy objectives and decided Milosevic needed taking care of in Serbia, Britain was there. There were other reasons too, but Britain’s attitude was “where our ally goes, we go.”

But not now. Why?

The answer lies in that Special Relationship. First re-established by President Reagan and Margaret Thatcher in the 1980’s after neglect during the Carter years, it has gonefrom strength to strength through multiple Prime Ministers and Presidents for decades. Then President Obama took the White House.

Obama's occasional photo ops with Cameron mask a horrifying truth underneath, that President Obama has obliterated the Anglo-American alliance since he took office, and is arguably one of the most anti-British Presidents of all time.

When President Obama took office, one of his first moves was to remove a bust of Churchill that Bush had been given by Tony Blair in the wake of 9/11. It was a symbol that Britain stood by America, and Obama’s disposal of it spoke volumes. The Anglo-American alliance was a relic of the Bush era, and would be swept away.

Other swipes, such as Obama’s false reference to BP as “British Petroleum,” his declaration that America had “no stronger ally” than France,the senior State Dept. official who said about Britain, “You’re just the same as the other 190 countries in the world. You shouldn’t expect special treatment” and the fact that not a single senior member of the Obama administration attended the funeral of Margaret Thatcher, all give indications about how Britain is seen in Obama’s America.

Yet the most galling snub to Britain comes in the form of the Falkland Islands dispute. Although British territory for centuries, and in the face of a population that consistently votes over 98% in favor of remaining British, Argentina have attempted to claim the Islands as their own.

After losing a war against Britain in the 1980’s, Argentina adopted a new tactic, calling for ‘negotiations’ to the sovereignty of the Islands, hoping to at least get a chunk of the land. The Obama administration, speaking through then Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, sided against their best ally, and with Kirchner’s Argentina, demanding Britain sit down with Argentina and negotiate sovereignty of the British territory under the pretense of neutrality.

All this contributes to a strong signal from the Obama administration that Britain is really not that important to America anymore.

If that is the case, then why should Britain stick its neck out, and put British lives on the line in a conflict that does not directly serve British interests?The argument that Britain has a duty to support its ally is simply not compelling enough in the Obama era.

Long ago President Obama decided that America didn’t need Britain anymore. As a consequence, Britain has now discovered that it doesn’t need America either. Mr. Obama is now paying for his poor judgment, and America is significantly weakened as a consequence.



headline: Like it or not, Constitution allows Obama to strike Syria without Congressional approval
byline: By John Yoo


Although hesitating to punish Syria for using chemical weapons, President Obama has decided that he can send the U.S. military into combat without Congress’s approval.

Two years ago, the president took the same approach when he ordered a bombing campaign against Mummar Qaddafi’s regime in Libya, again without congressional consent.

But this was not always President Obama’s view. Anti-war Democrats vigorously challenged President George W. Bush’s conduct of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq by claiming that he had violated Congress’s right to declare war. 

As a presidential candidate in 2007, Obama agreed: “The President does not have power under the Constitution to unilaterally authorize a military attack in a situation that does not involve stopping an actual or imminent threat to the nation.”

Despite his mistakes in reading his domestic powers too broadly, this time President Obama has the Constitution about right.  His exercise of war powers rests firmly in the tradition of American foreign policy.

Fast forward four years. 

In announcing the intervention in Libya, Mr. Obama told Congress that he was acting “pursuant to my constitutional authority to conduct U.S. foreign relations and as commander in chief and chief executive.” 

Fast forward again to today. 

The White House again has decided it does not need Congress’s blessing to bomb targets in Syria related to the chemical weapons attack last week, over the objections of 200 members of Congress who are demanding that Obama seek legislative approval. 

Republican Congressman Justin Amash, for example, claims that it is “unquestionably unconstitutional and illegal” for the president to strike Syria without congressional consent – a position taken not just by isolationist Republicans like Senator Rand Paul but by anti-war Democrats like Jerrold Nadler.

Despite his mistakes in reading his domestic powers too broadly, this time President Obama has the Constitution about right. His exercise of war powers rests firmly in the tradition of American foreign policy.

Throughout our history, neither presidents nor Congresses have acted under the belief that the Constitution requires a declaration of war before the U.S. can conduct military hostilities abroad.

We have used force abroad more than 100 times but declared war in only five cases: the War of 1812, the Mexican-American and Spanish-American Wars, and World Wars I and II.

Without any congressional approval, presidents have sent forces to battle Indians, Barbary pirates and Russian revolutionaries, to fight North Korean and Chinese communists in Korea, to engineer regime changes in South and Central America, and to prevent human rights disasters in the Balkans.

Other conflicts, such as the 1991 Persian Gulf War, the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, and the 2003 Iraq War, received legislative “authorization” but not declarations of war. 

The practice of presidential initiative, followed by congressional acquiescence, has spanned both Democratic and Republican administrations and reaches back from President Obama to Presidents Abraham Lincoln, Thomas Jefferson, and George Washington.

Common sense does not support replacing the way our Constitution has worked in wartime with a radically different system that mimics the peacetime balance of powers between president and Congress.

If the issue were the environment or Social Security, Congress would enact policy first and the president would faithfully implement it second. But the Constitution does not duplicate this system in war. Instead, our Framers decided that the president would play the leading role in matters of national security.

Those in the pro-Congress camp call upon the anti-monarchical origins of the American Revolution for support. If the Framers rebelled against King George III’s dictatorial powers, surely they would not give the president much authority. 

It is true that the revolutionaries rejected the royal prerogative, created weak state governors, and turned a skeptical eye toward federal power. Rejecting these failed experiments, however, the Framers restored an independent, unified chief executive with its own powers in national security and foreign affairs. 

The most important of the president’s powers are commander-in-chief and chief executive.

As Alexander Hamilton wrote in Federalist 74, “The direction of war implies the direction of the common strength, and the power of directing and employing the common strength forms a usual and essential part in the definition of the executive authority.”

Presidents should conduct war, he wrote, because they could act with “decision, activity, secrecy, and dispatch.” In perhaps his most famous words, Hamilton wrote: “Energy in the executive is a leading character in the definition of good government. . . It is essential to the protection of the community against foreign attacks.”

The Framers realized the obvious. Foreign affairs are unpredictable and involve the highest of stakes, making them unsuitable to regulation by pre-existing legislation. Instead, they can demand swift, decisive action, sometimes under pressured or even emergency circumstances, that are best carried out by a branch of government that does not suffer from multiple vetoes or is delayed by disagreements. 

Congress is too large and unwieldy to take the swift and decisive action required in wartime. 

Our Framers replaced the Articles of Confederation, which had failed in the management of foreign relations because it had no single executive, with the Constitution’s single president for precisely this reason. Even when it has access to the same intelligence as the executive branch, Congress’s loose, decentralized structure would paralyze American policy while foreign threats grow. 

Congress has no political incentive to mount and see through its own wartime policy. Members of Congress, who are interested in keeping their seats at the next election, do not want to take stands on controversial issues where the future is uncertain. They will avoid like the plague any vote that will anger large segments of the electorate. They prefer that the president take the political risks and be held accountable for failure.

Congress's track record when it has opposed presidential leadership has not been a happy one.

Perhaps the most telling example was the Senate's rejection of the Treaty of Versailles at the end of World War I. Congress's isolationist urge kept the United States out of Europe at a time when democracies fell and fascism grew in their place. Even as Europe and Asia plunged into war, Congress passed Neutrality Acts designed to keep the United States out of the conflict.

President Franklin Roosevelt violated those laws to help the Allies and draw the nation into war against the Axis. While pro-Congress critics worry about a president's foreign adventurism, the real threat to our national security may come from inaction and isolationism.

Many point to the Vietnam War as an example of the faults of the “imperial presidency.” Vietnam, however, could not have continued without the consistent support of Congress in raising a large military and paying for hostilities. And Vietnam ushered in a period of congressional dominance that witnessed American setbacks in the Cold War, and the passage of the ineffectual War Powers Resolution. Congress passed the Resolution in 1973 over President Nixon's veto, and no president, Republican or Democrat, George W. Bush or Obama, has ever accepted the constitutionality of its 60-day limit on the use of troops abroad. No federal court has ever upheld the resolution. Even Congress has never enforced it.

Despite the record of practice and the Constitution’s institutional design, critics nevertheless argue for a radical remaking of the American way of war. They typically base their claim on Article I, Section 8, of the Constitution, which gives Congress the power to “declare War.” But these observers read the eighteenth-century constitutional text through a modern lens by interpreting “declare War” to mean “start war.” 

When the Constitution was written, however, a declaration of war served diplomatic notice about a change in legal relations between nations. It had little to do with launching hostilities. In the century before the Constitution, for example, Great Britain – where the Framers got the idea of the declare-war power – fought numerous major conflicts but declared war only once beforehand.

Our Constitution sets out specific procedures for passing laws, appointing officers, and making treaties. There are none for waging war, because the Framers expected the president and Congress to struggle over war through the national political process.

In fact, other parts of the Constitution, properly read, support this reading. Article I, Section 10, for example, declares that the states shall not “engage” in war “without the consent of Congress” unless “actually invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit of delay.” 

This provision creates exactly the limits desired by anti-war critics, complete with an exception for self-defense. If the Framers had wanted to require congressional permission before the president could wage war, they simply could have repeated this provision and applied it to the executive.

Presidents, of course, do not have complete freedom to take the nation to war. Congress has ample powers to control presidential policy, if it wants to. 

Only Congress can raise the military, which gives it the power to block, delay, or modify war plans.

Before 1945, for example, the United States had such a small peacetime military that presidents who started a war would have to go hat in hand to Congress to build an army to fight it. 

Since World War II, it has been Congress that has authorized and funded our large standing military, one primarily designed to conduct offensive, not defensive, operations (as we learned all too tragically on 9/11) and to swiftly project power worldwide. 

If Congress wanted to discourage presidential initiative in war, it could build a smaller, less offensive-minded military.

Congress’s check on the presidency lies not just in the long-term raising of the military. It can also block any immediate armed conflict through the power of the purse.

If Congress feels it has been misled in authorizing war, or it disagrees with the president's decisions, all it need do is cut off funds, either all at once or gradually.

It can reduce the size of the military, shrink or eliminate units, or freeze supplies. Using the power of the purse does not even require affirmative congressional action.

Congress can just sit on its hands and refuse to pass a law funding the latest presidential adventure, and the war will end quickly. 

Even the Kosovo war, which lasted little more than two months and involved no ground troops, required special funding legislation.

The Framers expected Congress's power of the purse to serve as the primary check on presidential war. During the 1788 Virginia ratifying convention, Patrick Henry attacked the Constitution for failing to limit executive militarism. James Madison responded: “The sword is in the hands of the British king; the purse is in the hands of the Parliament. It is so in America, as far as any analogy can exist.” Congress ended America’s involvement in Vietnam by cutting off all funds for the war.

Our Constitution has succeeded because it favors swift presidential action in war, later checked by Congress’s funding power. If a president continues to wage war without congressional authorization, as in Libya, Kosovo, or Korea, it is only because Congress has chosen not to exercise its easy check.

We should not confuse a desire to escape political responsibility for a defect in the Constitution.A radical change in the system for making war might appease critics of presidential power. But it could also seriously threaten American national security.

In order to forestall another 9/11 attack, or to take advantage of a window of opportunity to strike terrorists or rogue nations, the executive branch needs flexibility.

It is not hard to think of situations where congressional consent cannot be obtained in time to act. Time for congressional deliberation, which leads only to passivity and isolation and not smarter decisions, will come at the price of speed and secrecy.

The Constitution creates a presidency that can respond forcefully to prevent serious threats to our national security.

Presidents can take the initiative and Congress can use its funding power to check them. Instead of demanding a legalistic process to begin war, the Framers left war to politics.

As we confront the new challenges of terrorism, rogue nations and WMD proliferation, now is not the time to introduce sweeping, untested changes in the way we make war.





headline: Three ways to take charge of your faith
byline: By Ian Morgan Cron


"We cannot live in a world that is not our own, in a world that is interpreted for us by others. An interpreted world is not a home. Part of the terror is to take back our own listening, to use our own voice, to see our own light."

I was thrown back on my heels when I came across this quote from the 11th Century Christian Saint, Hildegard of Bingen.

Her warning is timely.

Many of us overly rely on pastors, seminary professors, or our favorite authors to interpret the world for us.

This isn’t an age specific mistake, but I attend too many conferences at which young people, in particular, appear to uncritically accept everything they hear from celebrity speakers on the stage.

Just once I’d like to hear a presenter finish a message saying, “But don’t take my word for it, these are my opinions. Take what I’ve said, wrestle with it, then come to your own conclusions.”

Just once I’d like to hear a presenter say, “But don’t take my word for it, these are my opinions. Take what I’ve said, then come to your own conclusions.”

Here are three suggestions for those who want to think more critically about their faith.

1. Trust the Spirit of Truth

Respect the insights of gifted teachers but take responsibility to engage in conversation with scripture, tradition, reason and experience and determine for yourself, what you ultimately believe. Trust the Spirit, “he will guide into all truth.”

2. Accept You Might Not Get It Right

Truth unfolds. You will inevitably look back and decide that your initial beliefs about a faith-related issue weren't right. Accept that what you believe today may not necessarily be what you believe tomorrow. Don't worry, as far as God is concerned it's the right intentioned search for truth that matters.

3. Embrace the Terror 

It’s terrifying “to take back our own listening, to use our own voice, to see our own light." It’s much easier to blindly buy into what "Professional Christians" say we should believe about the world, the Bible, or the way we live.

Don't outsource your faith!

Embrace the terror that comes with taking responsibility for your own walk with God and the way you choose to interpret the world. 

Then again, don’t take my word for it; this is only my opinion.





headline: Obama's got only five options when it comes to Syria
byline: By K.T. McFarland


As the Obama administration contemplates a possible military strike against Syria, it would be useful for everyone to take a step back and ponder what we want to accomplish with such an attack.

What are the president’s objectives and how will an attack achieve those objectives? What are his options?

It’s understandable that we want to “do something.” Those pictures of linen-wrapped children, dead from inhaling chemical weapons, are horrifying. But there is only one thing worse than doing nothing – that is doing something that makes things even worse. And whatever we do, our first and foremost goal should be what is best for America.

We have to find a way to get off the Middle East merry-go-round of death and destruction, that Arab oil has chained us to.

So what are the president’s options? Here are five:

Option One: Regime Change. We could launch major attacks and destroy Assad’s war making ability, presumably in conjunction with allies and Syrian rebels, so Assad ends up like Libya’s Qaddafi. Ironically, Bush administration NeoCons and Obama Interventionists have finally found common cause – both want to topple Assad. Even President Obama himself said two years ago that Assad "must go."

But, if the last ten years have taught us anything, it should be that toppling dictators doesn’t necessarily lead to something better.

We toppled dictators in Iraq, Libya, and Egypt, and were assured there was a pro-democracy, Western leaning-cadre ready to step in and assume the reins of power. Iraq led to ten years of bloody war, Libya led to Benghazi and Egypt to a Muslim Brotherhood dictatorship.

With Syria, we already know that the rebel groups likely to prevail are Al Qaeda affiliates. As bad as Assad is, an Al Qaeda-led Syria would be even worse for America. 

It's a cardinal rule of foreign policy that if two of your enemies are trying to destroy each other, don't step in and try to stop them. If we try to unseat Assad, it's doubtful his Iranian and Russian allies would stand silently by. At a minimum, Iran would redouble its efforts to develop nuclear weapons as soon as possible.

Option Two: Limited Attack. We could launch a limited attack to destroy the helicopters and planes that delivered the chemical weapons. According to press reports, the administration is leaning in this direction. 

It would give Assad a symbolic public spanking, but the civil war would continue, with both sides more or less where they are today. 

It would make good on Obama’s “red line” threat and serve to “punish Assad,” as Secretary Kerry pledged.

The administration is also hoping it would deter Assad, but there is no guarantee he wouldn't use chemical weapons again, since the caches would remain untouched. It’s just as likely that Assad could decide to double down and use chemical weapons again, thus leaving Obama in the uncomfortable position of having to escalate U.S. involvement. 

It’s possible the president would be faced with the one thing he wants to avoid and the American people deplore – getting involved in another civil war in the Middle East.

Option Three: Arm the Rebels. We could openly arm and train the Syrian rebels to do the job for us. The question is, which rebels?

This may have been a viable option two years ago, but today even those in favor of arming the rebels admit that the strongest among the many rebel groups are linked to Al Qaeda. As dangerous as Assad possessing chemical weapons might be, Al Qaeda having them would be even worse – Al Qaeda has long sought to get its hands on weapons of mass destruction to use against Americans.

If we arm the good rebels, it would be in hopes they could defeat both the Al Qaeda rebels and the Assad government.

At best, that would put us in the middle of a three-way civil war: we support our rebels, while the Arab oil states support their rebels, and Iran and Russia support the Assad government. 

At worst, the Al Qaeda rebels seize our weapons, and use them first against Assad and then against us? 

Sound farfetched? That’s what happened in Benghazi.

Option Four: Destroy the Chemical Weapons. According to some military experts, we have non-conventional "agent defeat" weapons designed specifically to neutralize chemical weapons without dispersing toxins into the atmosphere.

One type first punctures chemical weapons containers and then smothers the toxins with neutralizing agents before they can be dispersed. 

Other military experts claim these exotic weapons are too experimental, or wouldn’t work, or work only if we first destroyed Syria’s air defenses. They claim if we want to destroy Assad’s chemical weapons, we would need special operations forces, in other words, boots on the ground – an option nobody wants. In either case, we could end up doing the very thing we’re trying to avoid: killing innocent civilians.

Option Five: Delay, Then Do Something Symbolic.President Obama was elected in part because of his opposition to the Iraq war, and criticism that President Bush’s casus belli, Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction, never existed.

Every day the evidence seems to mount that the Assad government did use chemical weapons to kill hundreds of innocent women and children. But the evidence is not incontrovertible, and may never be. 

Obama could decide to wait for more proof. As long as chemical weapons are not used again, the public clamor to ‘do something’ would abate. The president could then satisfy his “red line” threat by lobbing a few cruise missiles on insignificant targets and call it a day.

But the message would be clear: America’s threats mean nothing. Assad and every other would-be murderous dictator would conclude the international community was unwilling to stop those willing to use weapons of mass destruction. Syria would see no consequence to using use chemical weapons again, and Iran would read it as a green light for their nuclear weapons program.

We are now left with no good choices. Thanks to President Obama’s “red line” threat last year, and his demand that “Assad must go” two years ago, he has put the U.S. between a rock and a hard place. Every parent knows you don’t make threats unless you’re willing to carry them out, since your bluff will always be called. So it should be a caution to all leaders – words don’t deter, only deeds so.

None of these options are risk free, all of them have potential consequences that would hurt Americans near term and long. 

The best of the bad lot is to find a way to destroy the chemical weapons caches so they can’t be used against us or our allies, without getting pulled into another conflict. We could then leave the Syrian civil war to the Syrians.

Syria sounds eerily like Iraq, and Libya, and Egypt. The same civil strife could be repeated in Lebanon, Jordan, Bahrain, and maybe even Saudi Arabia in the future.

Syria is the harbinger of a decade, if not a generation, of Middle East conflict as radical Sunni groups square off against radical Shiites. We have to find a way to get off the Middle East merry-go-round of death and destruction, that Arab oil has chained us to.

Fifty years ago President Kennedy committed America to landing a man on the moon within a decade. President Obama should similarly commit America to becoming energy self sufficient and free of Arab oil by the end of his presidency. 

He should approve the Keystone Pipeline immediately, and unshackle our oil and natural gas companies so they can develop America’s domestic energy sources. Not only will it give the American economy a much-needed boost, it will allow America to declare its independence from the internecine wars which have plagued the Middle East since Cain slew Abel. 

If not, America will find itself, time and time again, caught in the middle of the same kind of ethno-sectarian civil wars that have ensnared us for the last 20 years. Despite spending trillions of dollars and spilling the blood of thousands of Americans, we remain in servitude to Arab oil.

Granted, the goal of energy independence may not help President Obama decide between the bad options he faces with Syria today, but the next president, and the one after that, will inherit a far more secure and independent nation.





headline: If Obama plans to strike Syria, he must first ask Congress for the green light
byline: By Rep. Ted Poe


The U.S. appears to be preparing for yet another war. Secretary of State John Kerry delivered the prelude for the president’s newest war earlier this week.

In his speech, Kerry described the brutal actions of the Assad Regime against the Syrian people. Indeed, these actions are horrific. Americans are compassionate; our hearts ache for the Syrian people. But Secretary Kerry's performance, his decision to beat the war drums, has left Americans with more questions than answers.

What is our imminent national security threat that would give us cause to attack Syria? There is none. If the administration has evidence to the contrary, it should present it to Congress and let us take a vote.

The Obama White House should not be firing missiles into Syria and launching America into another war without Congressional approval.

Who are our "allies"?

There are two main "groups" of actors in Syria. On one side we have "the rebels" trying to oust Assad from power.

But who are they?

We know the most powerful among them is Al Nusra, an affiliate of Al Qaeda. So is America now joining forces with Al Qaeda? (Last I heard we were at war with Al Qaeda) Also on “the rebels” side are Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and numerous rebel factions from patriots to criminals to terrorists and outside mercenaries. 

The roots of the Syrian civil war are based on a religious conflict that dates back to the year 630. Militants on both sides are killing each other in the name of religion, and the people of Syria are caught in the middle.

Lining up on side of the Assad regime are the nations of Russia and Iran, including its proxy terrorist group Hezbollah, who have vowed to stand by their ally. What do all three of these nations have in common? They hate America.

What is our plan of action? Earlier this summer, the administration wanted to arm the rebels in Syria with weapons. Now, months later, the conflict has escalated even further and more people have died.

Since the first planned failed, the White House is moving to its next plan--direct U.S. military intervention. Fire some missiles at Syria and send America to war.

Here we go again.

What will be the consequences of this war? More people will die. American troops will also be in danger. Unlike the Libyans, Syrian forces actually have the ability to retaliate against us.

Hasn’t the president learned from Libya that there are long term, serious consequences for getting the U.S. involved in someone else’s war? 

While our weapons systems are second to none, unlike Qaddafi's guerrilla armies, Assad possesses the capability to strike back with advanced anti-ship missiles, potentially leading to U.S. military casualties.

Once the U.S. strikes, there is no telling how Assad, a dictator who has already shown a willingness to murder thousands of his own people, or his backer Iran will respond.

Iran will not let Assad go down without a fight. This will be the beginning of an escalated crisis in Syria at the very least....or it could be Act I of a much larger war with Iran.

Syria's other ally, Russia, said that U.S. military intervention would be catastrophic. There will be consequences for the United States if it gets directly involved in this war that will extend far beyond the borders of Syria.

Congress, not unelected members of the administration, should fully consider them before we proceed with military action.

What is the legal authority of the president to go to war? According to a former professor of constitutional law: “The president does not have power under the Constitution to unilaterally authorize a military attack in a situation that does not involve stopping an actual or imminent threat to the nation." 

I could not have said it better myself. That sentence was uttered by candidate Barack Obama in 2007.

By his own logic, it would be illegal for him to take the United States to war without the approval of Congress because there is no imminent threat to our nation. 

Military intervention in Syria would be a violation of the War Powers Resolution. According to the Constitution, it is Congress, and Congress alone, that has the power to declare war. James Madison said, ‘‘The Constitution supposes what history of all governments demonstrates, that the executive is the branch of power most interested in war, and most prone to it.” Madison was right on the money.

Assad may have crossed the administration's redline, but he is a dictator. President Obama is not.

This is a democracy where the Constitution is paramount -- no president is above the law. The law of the land requires that the Executive and Legislative Branches make this decision together. 

After all, Congress represents the will of the people. And according to a Reuters poll taken days ago, only 25% of Americans support military action in Syria. Support from one quarter of the population hardly provides the president with a mandate to unilaterally lead our nation into yet another war. 

The White House should not be firing missiles into another country and launching America into another war without Congressional approval.

Mr. President, you must call Congress back from recess immediately to take a vote on a military strike on Syria. Assad may have crossed a red line but that does not give you the authority to redline the Constitution.





headline: United States is raising a nation of savages
byline: By Todd Starnes


Christopher Lane was gunned down in cold blood – shot in the back as he jogged alongside a road in Duncan, Okla. His alleged attackers were teenagers who told police they were bored and killed the college athlete for “the fun of it.”

The 22-year-old was attending school at East Central University – an Australian native who played baseball.

Good Samaritans saw the shooting and immediately rushed to offer aid. One person called 911. Another tried to administer CPR. But it was too late. The young athlete with a promising future lingered for several minutes – gasping for air. And then he died – on a lonely stretch of an Oklahoma roadway.

Police Chief Dan Ford said they found a chilling message on one of the alleged killer’s Facebook pages: “Bang. Two drops in two hours.”

“I think they were on a killing spree,” Ford told Australian Associated Press. “We would have had more bodies that night if we didn’t get them.”

In other words – the teenage boys were hunting humans.

In Northwest Indiana, a 17-year-old boy is accused of hunting and killing three kittens with a bow and arrow. Police told CBS News in Chicago the teenager skewered the kittens on an arrow.

Investigator Michelle Dvorscak told the television station the boy posted the photographs on Facebook.

“He did confess,” she said. “He said he was bored out of his mind the week before school started and decided to hunt some kittens.”

In Brunswick, Ga. two teenagers are accused of shooting a young mother and murdering her 13-month-old child. Sherry West was taking her baby out for a stroll when the boys demanded she give them cash.

“A boy approached me and told me he wanted my money, and I told him I didn’t have any money,” the woman told reporters. “And he said, ‘Give me your money or I’m going to kill you and I’m going to shoot your baby and kill your baby.”

She pleaded with them to spare her child – but one of the boys took a gun and shot the 13-month-old between the eyes.

The United States is now reaping what it has sown – for raising a nation of savages.

We live in a nation that celebrates and glorifies violence. The proof is in our movies, our music, and our athletic pastimes.

“Violence has become the new pornography of our culture,” noted author Robert Jeffress tells me. “One cause of the violence is the unprecedented and explicit violence in video games and cable television. It’s desensitized teenagers to the idea of taking a human life.”

Jeffress, pastor of the First Baptist Church in Dallas, Tex., said parents bear responsibility for raising a generation of thugs roaming the streets in search of their prey.

“Parents have absolutely failed in their most basic, fundamental responsibility as parents,” he said. “And that is to instill God’s moral law in the hearts of their children.”

The Good Book indeed says the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

“As long as you continue to tell teenagers they are nothing but a biological accident, we shouldn’t expect them to act in accordance with a Creator-God who has basic laws concerning life and death,” Pastor Jeffress tells me.

It’s true that American culture has turned its back on God. As a result, we’ve lost our moral compass – replacing the moral absolutes of the Almighty with the moral whims of an all-knowing federal government.

Right is now wrong and wrong is now right. And under the leadership of President Obama criminals have become victims and their prey have become afterthoughts – ingredients for the surge in teenage violence.

“Our culture continues to deny or marginalize the existence of God,” Jeffress tells me. “We shouldn’t be surprised that teenagers would ignore the most basic laws of God – like thou shall not kill.”

And as the stench of our rotting culture sweeps across the nation, I’ve come to the conclusion that we have reached a moment in history when the make-believe world of violence no longer satisfies our bloodlust.

The United States is now reaping what it has sown – for raising a nation of savages.









headline: America's Mideast policies need a reality -- and morality -- check
byline: By Rabbi Abraham Cooper


On June 4, 2009, President Barack Obama made his historic "New Beginning" speech in Cairo, boldly seeking to harken a new day for the U.S. and the Muslim world. But all the high hopes and expectations have been swept aside by the roiling events in the Middle East.

While the President and his team cannot be blamed for every unforeseen twist and turn in the region, the failure to articulate and back up a clear moral vision has damaged America’s influence among allies and foes.

First was President Obama’s failure to speak out in solidarity with the people of Iran when they heroically took to the streets protesting the gerrymandered re-election of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Obama's silence was duly noted by the Ayatollahs and helped drive devastated protesters back into desperate silence.

Then there is Syria. The U.S. cannot be blamed for Bashir Assad’s butchery, but today we are left with a horrific choice between acquiescing to his thuggery or empowering Al Qaeda terrorists. Many are left with a deep sense of unease over the gnawing question: How many lives would have been saved, how many refugees would have stayed put, how would the landscape look today, if the President had dispatched NATO to impose a no-fly zone before the Islamists filled the void?

As events in the Middle East and beyond continue to spiral out of control, we are witness to an unprecedented erosion of U.S. clout.

Now, regarding Egypt, we are caught between a rock and a hard place. Despite many signals to the contrary, the administration willed itself to believe that the Muslim Brotherhood --the mother ship of Islamist extremism -- having won power through democraticprocesswould embrace democratic principles. Hence, the virtual moral free pass provided by the U.S. for Morsi’s administration, during which Coptic Christians lived in fear for their safety, rights, and churches, and tens of millions of people who do not think or pray like the Brotherhood watched in dread as their Tahrir Square revolution was co-opted by religious fanatics. Now after the military takeover, our lack of clarity and courage has all sides in the Arab world’s largest nation furious at America.

And now the absence of moral backbone is undermining support among the U.S.’s only reliable ally, democratic Israel.

In the past few days, Israel was forced by the U.S. to release 26 Palestinian terrorists convicted of murdering innocent Israelis -- Jews and Arabs, from babies to grandmothers.

Instead of confirming that the release of these reprehensible individuals was an unfortunate, but necessary measure to jump-start "the peace process," State Department spokeswoman Marie Harf refused to even identify them as terrorists: "I do not have a position on that," she boldly asserted. Asked whether the Obama administration objects to the Palestinian Authority officially designating murderers and terrorists as "freedom fighters" and "political prisoners," she answered repeatedly: "I don't have a position on that."

Her mealymouthed dodge added more salt to the wounds of bereaved relatives of the victims, and must have brought a satisfied smile to the leadership of the Palestinians. What a gift the United States is delivering: 126 living 'heroes' along with the remains of dead 'martyrs,' a move that threatens to blow open a hole between Washington and Jerusalem. Large enough to drive a suicide bomber through.

As for the released Palestinians, since the State Department won't say, here is a partial list of the first 26 released and some of their crimes.Murderers or freedom fighters? You decide.

• Khaled Asakreh: April 1991, murdered Annie Ley, a French tourist in Bethlehem.

• Hosni and Mohemed Sawalha: December 1990, stabbed to death Baruch Heisler on a bus and injured three other passengers.

• Midhat Barbakh: January 1994, stabbed and killed his employer, Moshe Beker, a citrus grower.

• Salah Mugdad: June 1993, murdered Israel Tenenbaum, an elderly guard at a hotel.

• Salameh Musleh: May 1991, he and accomplice beat to death Reuven David in Petach Tikva.

• Atiyeh abu Musa: March 1993, axed to death Isaac Rotenberg, a survivor of the infamous Nazi death camp, Sobibor.

• Yusef Abed al-Al: 1993, took part in the murder of Ian Feinberg in the Gaza Strip; murdered a Palestinian who was suspected of collaboration with Israel.

• Ala Eddin Abu Sitteh: December 31, 1993, he took part in the murder and desecrating the bodies of Haim Weizman and David Dadi.

Forcing Jerusalem to release terrorists without Secretary of State John Kerry demanding anything from the Palestinians in return is difficult enough to swallow for Israelis. Watching the spokesperson for the United States government declare that we are agnostic about whether they are "freedom fighters" is an outrage.

The only way forward for this great nation is to ground our foreign policy in reality, not wishful thinking. As events in the Middle East and beyond continue to spiral out of control, we are witness to an unprecedented erosion of U.S. clout. Tossing out our moral compass won't help. It will only succeed in further empowering those who sneer at our values and seek America’s demise.

Historian Dr. Harold Brackman contributed to this essay.





headline: A look at ObamaCare's significant, widespread and very real problems
byline: By Edmund F. Haislmaier


ObamaCare is poised to “destroy the foundation of the 40 hour work week that is the backbone of the American middle class.” And that’s the president’s supporters talking.

The dire warning came last month in a letter from three of the nation’s most influential union bosses to Democratic leaders in Congress.

“Theunintended consequences of the ACA [Affordable Care Act] are severe,” the labor leaders bemoaned. “Perverse incentives are already creating nightmare scenarios.”

Specifically, they noted, “the law creates an incentive for employers to keep employees’ work hours below 30 hours a week, and many of them are doing so openly.The impact is two-fold: fewer hours means less pay while also losing our current health benefits.”

With an ObamaCare “train wreck” heading down the track it is still not too late for those who originally voted for the law to repent.

The White House maintains that such concerns, originally raised by analysts at The Heritage Foundation and elsewhere before ObamaCare was signed into law, are purely chimerical.

Those news reports of employers cutting workers’ hours to escape the ObamaCare mandate? Not to worry, the administration says soothingly, it’s merely “anecdotal.”

Yet anecdotal reports are becoming increasingly frequent—indicating that a wave of reductions in workers’ hours may well be in the offing.

For example, reporters from NBC recently interviewed nearly 20 employers around the country, from fast-food franchises to colleges, and found that “almost all said that because of the new law they’d be cutting back hours for some employees.”

This is just the latest piece of evidence indicating that ObamaCare is unfair, unaffordable and unworkable.Consider some other recent news items:

The problems with ObamaCare are very significant, very widespread, and very real. The president can remain in denial if he wants, but the stakes are too high for Congress to bury its collective head in the sand.With an ObamaCare “train wreck” heading down the track it is still not too late for Congressmen and Senators who originally voted for ObamaCare three years ago to now repent and repeal.





headline: Jobs hunt getting you down -- how to build a full-time life in a part-time world
byline: By Robert Dickie


Cultural shifts through industrial and technological advances have re-written maps and world histories as people responded to events, grasping for that which drives humankind: survival.

The Industrial age shaped cities, while famine and disease shift whole populations from one continent to another. These kinds of events fill our history books, but they’re not over.

We are confronting economic forces reshaping our economy today. Job seekers must face a paradigm shift: how can they build a full-time life in a part-time world.

It is not your grandparent’s economy anymore.

The growing realities of finding and holding gainful employment means that new patterns must be developed to win in a game with new rules. It is not your grandparent’s economy anymore.

In light of the Labor Department’s jobs report out Friday revealing once again that fewer jobs had been created than expected, the time is now to take a hard look at what a jobless recovery means to those who want to work.

Case in point: The hardening sector of part-time employees (people unable to find full-time work) cannot be ignored any longer or written off as a temporary correction. The Wall Street Journal recently reported, “More people have left the workforce than got a new job during the recovery—by a factor of nearly three.”

Since the recession officially began in December 2007, 5.8 million fewer Americans hold a full time job, while 2.8 million more are working part time (defined as people working less than 35 hours a week.).

The impact of this kind of math on the moving target of the unemployment rate was recently noted in the New York Times, “If you include both part-time workers who want full-time work and people who have stopped looking for jobs but still want to work, the unemployment rate is actually 14.3 percent.”

Universally reported, the impact of ObamaCare on a growing part-time employment rate looms large. Employers will be required to pay fines or fund costly insurance plans for full-time employees, pushing them to create more part-time positions in response.

Most affected by the scarcity of full-time jobs are young people, college graduates, and those in mid-career transition. 

Currently, there are about 40 percent of 20-somethings who are underemployed, according to the American Staffing Association.

In fact, almost half of recent college graduates are in jobs that require no degree, leaving many to question the value of their college education.

The American dream of employer and employee bound ‘til death do us part is passing away. Today we must become “life-style entrepreneurs” and embrace mobility as we leverage our skills in creative ways. As with every economic shift, these changes can be daunting.

It’s widely believed that the average U.S. worker will have seven careers in a lifetime. To begin that process, here are seven tips to help find those different careers and have success during this transition:

Over a 50-year span, the average American spends about 100,000 hours working. No matter how many full or part time jobs make up that math, a life well lived can be achieved by embracing new opportunities … wherever they may be found.



headline: 'I am not a monster' -- inside the mind of Ariel Castro
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


I have written before that there is no original evil left in the world; everyone is just recycling pain.

Ariel Castro was, of course, wrong when he claimed, bizarrely, Thursday that there was “harmony” in the house where he kept three women hostage, repeatedly beating and raping them. But he was correct when he stated that he is not a monster.

Ariel Castro was not born a predator. He became one. I believe him when he says he himself was sexually abused. And, while most victims of sexual abuse harm no one later in life, Ariel Castro is an extreme example of what can happen in adulthood, when a child has been destroyed psychologically.

Based on my nearly two decades as an adult, adolescent and forensic psychiatrist, talking at the level of the soul and the gut about the human psyche with everyone from anxious kids, to abused women, to gang members, to men who have raped and killed, the origin of Castro’s evil is the house of horrors in which he alludes to being raised.

I promise you that what Castro has been convicted of creating in Cleveland—a “home” where three women were allegedly held in ropes and chains, beaten and raped, where children were either enslaved or aborted—will turn out to be a magnified version (perhaps 2X, perhaps 100X) of the home in which he was raised.

Once someone no longer can appreciate the pain of others, that person is “free,” in a terrible and terrifying way, to perpetrate horrific acts.

There, Casto reportedly maintains in an alleged suicide note which may have been written in 2004 and was found inside his home, that he was emotionally, physically and sexually abused by relatives.

That is the reason why Ariel Castro can maintain that the house of horrors he created in Cleveland was a place of “harmony:” Because Ariel Castro needed to summon psychotic levels of denial to barely exist in the house in which he was raised. I would bet that calling that place “harmonious” wouldn’t be much more of a reach than calling it “harmony” to be abducted and raped.

Castro’s diagnosis may turn out to be psychopathy, but the real key to understanding him is that he lacked empathy. And once someone no longer can appreciate the pain of others, that person is “free,” in a terrible and terrifying way, to perpetrate horrific acts.

In fact, the torture that a person lives through that crushes his empathy, can be enough to create a house of mirrors, in which one reproduces his own suffering again, and again, and again, like the work of art by M.C. Escher of a hand drawing a hand, never quite being able to escape the dehumanized recreation of his own destruction.

Castro reportedly said as much in his suicide note. He cannot understand his addiction to taking women prisoner and knows, someplace deep inside him—which we may as well think of as the voice of God—that what he is doing is predatory and wrong and hellish. Yet, he cannot stop.

Perhaps, had Castro a little more intelligence or a spiritual guide or had been lucky enough to have been incarcerated early in life and introduced to a gifted prison psychiatrist, he might have noted that he is one of three brothers and he took three people hostage.

He might have noted that he and his brothers are all reportedly psychologically hobbled, chained to pathology of one kind or another (supposedly, including addiction). He might have noted that two of his adult brothers still live with their aging mother, like hulking, disempowered infants, like, one might wonder, prisoners.

You don’t take three women hostage and make them abort repeatedly and beat them and humiliate them and sexually attack them if you have true, loving feelings for your mother.

But you might do that, if you deny all your primal, murderous rage toward that woman, because it is too psychologically threatening to feel it at 5 or 6 or 13 or 50-years-old, and it ends up erupting out of you—directed at every female you see, including your own wife and daughters.

It is popular to speak of children as resilient. It is a complete and utter myth.

Children are exquisitely emotionally sensitive. The seeds of major depression and panic disorder and PTSD and borderline personality disorder and, yes, antisocial (psychopathic) personality disorder are most often sown in childhood and adolescence. And while someone may be born gifted by God with a hardy brain chemistry, with serotonin and norepinephrine and dopamine aplenty, many are not, and are, therefore, even more vulnerable, from birth.

Ariel Castro is right about one thing, and maybe only one thing. He is no devil. He is no "monster."He’s an abused, ruined decent boy made rancid by psychological dynamics that were at one time entirely beyond his control.

Does that mean he should not have been held responsible for failing to resist the dark forces that developed inside him? No, it does not.

Do lives sometimes tend unavoidably toward darkness? Yes, they do.

What does this imply for justice? That question is part of the human condition. We will debate it, forever.

I write these words because I just want to understand. I just want the truth. And I just told you the truth, too.

Make of it what you will. Do with it, what you want.

But now you know what I know having met men who killed their wives with bats and guns and knives, and women who beat their daughters and raped their sons, and teenagers who preyed viciously on other teenagers.

Every single case began at least a generation before—and, every time I have looked, more than one generation, and, sometimes, three or four.

I leave you with the words of philosopher Martin Buber and your own life story, to contemplate. Make of his words and your days all you can:

“Love ranges in its effect through the whole world. In the eyes of him who takes his stand in love, and gazes out of it . . . good people and evil people, wise and foolish, beautiful and ugly, become successively real to him; that is . . . they confront him as Thou...Love is the responsibility of an I for a Thou. In this lies the likeliness . . . of all who love, from the smallest to the greatest and from the blessedly protected man, whose life is rounded in that of a loved being, to him who is all his life nailed to a cross of the world, and who ventures to bring himself to the dreadful point—to love all men.”

Only a predator would fail to hate what Ariel Castro did. But only a heartless person would fail to grieve the loss of the potential for goodness he was born with, which was stolen from him, decades ago, in a house of horrors we still know almost nothing about.





headline: Todd Starnes asks, 'Is my column really a threat to national security?'
byline: By Todd Starnes


The Utah Air National Guard has suspended the security clearance of an airman who complained about gay weddings at West Point after he posted stories I had written on his personal Facebook page.

Tech Sergeant Layne Wilson is a 27-year veteran of the Utah Air National Guard. He was reprimanded after he wrote an email to the chaplain at West Point objecting to a gay wedding in the West Point Chapel.

He was later told to prepare for early retirement because his personal beliefs about homosexuality were not compatible with the military’s policies.

The Utah Air National Guard eventually reversed that decision – but the reprimand remained. And now – the military has decided to issue an additional punishment.

Who knew that your friendly neighborhood commentator is a threat to national security?

Wilson’s attorney tells me they’ve suspended his client’s security clearance because of his Facebook postings.

“They said his Facebook postings made them question his allegiance to the United States,” attorney John Wells told me. “Our country was built on the ability to speak one’s mind and to worship as one chooses. It would appear that this administration is trying to undermine those basic rights.”

The military uncovered 74 pages of objectionable Facebook postings – including two that were links to stories I had written and posted on my website.

The first item the military considered to be a threat to national security was a story I wrote about a university that ordered a student to remove her cross necklace.

The other story they found objectionable was a story about a preacher who had been arrested for calling homosexuality a sin.

“I don’t know how a post about a young girl forced to remove her crucifix is a threat to national security,” Wells said.

Wells said he’s had a chance to study all 74 pages and hasn’t been able to find a single offensive posting.

“There were some anti-Obama posts urging impeachment, a criticism of religious persecution and support for the Constitution,” he said. “There were one or two posts about Edward Snowden that supported his revelations about domestic spying and one comment from Layne that if he went to jail that would be a travesty.”

Wells also seemed puzzled as to why my writings have been deemed a threat by military personnel.

“What is worse, these posts were made while he was a civilian and not on duty with the Air National Guard,” he said. “This is an unconscionable attempt …to censor free expression.”

These are indeed troubling times for our Armed Forces as Obama appointees turn the military into a social engineering petri dish.

And I’m mighty sorry Tech Sergeant Wilson may have gotten into trouble because of something I wrote.

Who knew that your friendly neighborhood commentator is a threat to national security? I’d better alert my accountant to prepare for a visit from the Internal Revenue Service.

I just hope there’s not a drone hovering outside my office window.





headline: Justice Department should let US Airways  American Airlines merger proceed
byline: By Thomas A. Bowden


This past Valentine’s Day, American Airlines and US Airways announced their intention to merge—but now, six months later, the federal government wants to cancel the wedding.

Unexpectedly, the Department of Justice has filed an antitrust lawsuit to block the merger, citing potential “harm to American consumers.”

The airlines’ merger proposal was based on ten months of intense negotiations in which CEOs dealt with complex relationships among labor unions, bondholders, and other financial stakeholders. If all that ends up in the wastebasket, so do the hopes and plans of American Airlines, which is emerging from bankruptcy, and US Airways, both eager to achieve economies of scale that could help them compete with Delta, United, and Southwest.

Corporations have a moral right to merge without government permission—but in our unfree economy, that right is not legally recognized or protected.

In America, big companies cannot merge without government permission. For the largest firms especially, it’s a tortuous and inscrutable process with no guarantee of success—just ask ATT, which wrote off $4 billion when its planned merger with T-Mobile in 2011 was barred by the Department of Justice.

Conventional wisdom holds that business mergers are not private matters—final authority must rest with antitrust regulators who can monitor, limit, and even forbid mergers and acquisitions that supposedly threaten the economy. Pursuant to the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act of 1976, businesses exceeding a certain size must ask federal permission to merge, and then endure a legal gauntlet to get an answer.

In this “Mother may I?” system, each proposed merger is automatically delayed thirty days—longer if the government requires it—while the DOJ and Federal Trade Commission sift through company documents and emails, compile statistics, run computations, and consult experts. Out of all the proposed mergers subjected to this legal scrutiny, only a select few are blocked. Which ones? Those that promise to be the most successful.

Antitrust enforcers want us to fear that mergers, if left unregulated, would allow large companies to destroy competition and hurt consumers. They use scary terms like “barriers to entry” and “monopoly prices” to paint a dire picture.

Into this dangerous landscape rides the antitrust cavalry, flags flying and guns blazing, offering itself as a brave guardian of economic freedom against rapacious capitalism.

Now let’s switch off this Hollywood movie and look at the facts. So long as government stays out of the picture—that means no protected monopolies, franchises, subsidies, licensing schemes, bailouts, or other forms of coercive favoritism—merging companies have only one avenue to success. They need to offer products and services that people want to acquire through voluntary, win/win transactions.

In a free market, we have nothing to fear from mergers, no matter how big the resulting enterprise. Just as a student cannot be “too smart” or an individual “too healthy,” a business cannot be “too successful” or “too profitable.”

If a particular company offers the most popular smartphones, cars, or airline tickets, then it may come to dominate its market. But no business, whatever its size, can let quality slip or raise prices too far above the cost of production without inviting competition from two sources—existing rivals, and venture capitalists who are constantly searching for opportunities to finance startups.

Regardless of what shape an industry takes, my only right as a customer is to buy or reject the products offered, at the prices offered—and it’s those choices that determine whether any merged company fails or succeeds.

For example, the 1999 merger between Exxon and Mobil enabled the company to streamline operations and combine exploration and production capacities, despite a government-mandated asset selloff. But ExxonMobil’s resulting success comes with no guarantees for the future, if the company lets product quality slip or raises prices to levels that Shell, Chevron, or some oil startup can undercut.

The bottom line is that corporations have a moral right to merge without government permission—but in our unfree economy, that right is not legally recognized or protected.

In March, just a month after American Airlines and US Airways announced their plans, both companies’ CEOs had to bow and scrape before a Senate panel, while the Government Accounting Office sounded warnings of projected changes to the airline industry.

Meanwhile, a New York Times editorial urged the DOJ not to approve the airlines’ merger “without requiring some concessions, like giving up gates and takeoff and landing slots.”

Sure enough, it was soon reported that regulators were holding meetings with the defenseless airlines. We can only surmise that the airlines resisted whatever forms of legalized extortion may have been proposed in those meetings, leading directly to the lawsuit that now threatens to kill the merger.

Antitrust laws deny companies the right to organize their business as they see fit. That’s an injustice we need to identify and condemn, undistracted by the mythical dangers of private mergers.





headline: Why Bill Clinton could survive a sex scandal but Filner and Weiner will not
byline: By Achim Nowak


The male-power-arrogance-stories just keep on coming.

Former New York congressman Anthony Weiner and San Diego Mayor Bob Filner are just the latest variations on a theme.

In California, eight women have come forward with increasingly explicit allegations of sexual harassment by the mayor. Last Friday, Mr. Filner faced the cameras to explain his side.

He offered the by-now-oh-so-familiar narrative of the embattled leader: A carefully crafted statement of contrition. A desire to change. A willingness to go to rehab.

Every one of us is the failed hero who yearns for a second chance. Every one of us is a Bob Filner or Anthony Weiner.

And a fierce commitment to hold on to power.

Anthony Weiner, now a candidate for mayor in New York City, is also vowing to stay in the race.

Really?

As I watched Mr. Filner’s press conference, I didn’t see a hint of emotion. I saw no relationship between the pretty words Mr. Filner read and his public demeanor. I saw, instead, someone who is cold, calculating, and defiant. Much like Anthony Weiner’s demeanor in his newly released campaign video.

That is male-power-arrogance writ large.

What irks me most is not their behavior. Their arrogance is a tired old story that is no longer a surprise. No, what stuns me is our willingness to invite politicians like these back into office, again and again, as the voters of South Carolina recently did with Mark Sanford.

Why don’t we consider a different kind of leader, instead? And I’m not talking about their politics. I’m talking about their personality make-up.

Mr. Filner exhibits no warmth.

None.

Mr. Weiner exhibits no warmth.

None.

No, these men are both prime examples of the male-power-ambition-arrogance species.

As flawed as President Bill Clinton’s conduct was, he possessed a personal warmth that enabled him to rebound from a national sex scandal with aplomb. When he hugged a voter or said, “I feel your pain,” we believed he really did care.

So what is the difference between a Bill Clinton and Weiner Filner?

Consider the research of Amy J.C. Cuddy. An Associate Professor at the Harvard Business School, Cuddy is in the forefront of global research which compellingly suggests that great leaders need to embody both warmth and competence (Harvard Business Review, July/August 2013). Not surprising, is it? But here’s the kicker. The ideal leader embodies a perfect balance of warmth and competence.

Even when President Clinton “did not have sexual relations” with then White House intern Monica Lewinsky, he was able to exude more warmth than we are witnessing today from either Weiner and Filner combined. Clinton left office with the highest approval rating of any president since World War II.

Aware of his own character deficit, Mr. Weiner last week trotted out Huma Abedin, his usually press-shy wife, to add the warmth factor.

In last year’s election cycle, both Barack Obama and Mitt Romney relied on their wives, Michelle and Ann, to reassure us that, yes, Barack and Mitt really were well-rounded, complete human beings.

Sad, isn’t it?

Didn’t you, too, have those moments when you thought, darn it, Michelle and Ann should be running for office instead?

Amy Cuddy uses the term “Happy Warrior” to define the leader with a deft warmth/competence mix. She offers former Texas governor Ann Richards as an example of a Happy Warrior.

Yes, a woman.

And when I look at the profiles of our male leaders in Congress right now, I am hard-pressed to find a single Happy Warrior in the bunch.

Crisis management consultants make mega-bucks to get the arrogant males off-the-hook. They write the pretty little lies which the likes of Weiner and Filner utter with competence but no heart.

Yes, they play the public like a well-tuned piano. They understand the emotional arc of the client- redemption-sonata, from our outrage at their failings to our all-too-quick amnesia and our eventual desire for their triumphant return. And they know that, in the end, it’s never about the fallen bad boy’s redemption. It’s about our own.

Every one of us is the failed hero who yearns for a second chance. Every one of us is a Bob Filner or Anthony Weiner. And every time we consider voting another male-arrogant-leader back into office, we’re diving into our personal reservoir of guilt and shame.

Mind you, I am a firm believer in human learning. I believe in doing the hard personal work. I believe in the potential for transformation. Most importantly, I believe in forgiveness.

I just don’t believe we have to elect a Bob Filner or an Anthony Weiner again.

Do community service. Make lots of money. Have a great life. But please move on.



Achim Nowakan international authority on leadership presence coaches entrepreneurs and Fortune 500 executives around the world. He is the author of "INFECTIOUS: How to Connect Deeply and Unleash the Energetic Leader Within" (Allworth Press, 2013). For more information visit his website:www.influens.com.



headline: Diagnosis for disaster: Obamanesia and a fuhgeddaboudit President
byline: By Jon Kraushar


Near the end of the 2012 election campaign, President Obama accused Mitt Romney of “at least Stage 3 Romnesia”-- which the President described as, “If you can't seem to remember the policies on your website or the promises you've been making over the six years you've been running for president, if you can't even remember what you said last week, don't worry.”

Well, Mr. President, look in the mirror for the faults in yourself that you attributed to Mr. Romney. According to the online Urban Dictionary, “Obamanesia” is, “A questionable commander in chief's partial or total loss of memory regarding the actual sequences of events in an attempt to not take responsibility for them. It is the opposite of Truman's famous phrase: ‘The Buck Stops Here!’ It is a strategy in politics where the one in power attempts to attribute to another person or group the responsibility for one's own lack of leadership or mistakes. Made famous by Barack Hussein Obama's denial of certain emails regarding the Libya incident 2012; after being caught with his pants down, he later tried to pin it on Hillary Clinton.”

A partial list of the president’s acts of “Obamanesia” include:

ObamaCare. The President’s mother of all health care reforms has turned into the mulligan of all health care reforms. Worrying that ObamaCare will hurt Democrats in the 2014 elections, the President keeps amending and delaying it, ignoring his constitutional obligation to fully implement and enforce a law he already signed.

The more we learn about ObamaCare from sources, including the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office, the more we learn how it will damage job creation (especially full-time jobs) and business growth, cost way more than advertised, grant special exemptions (e.g. to Congress), deny us the choices we were promised to keep our health care plans and doctors, raise taxes, increase our wait time for medical treatments while eroding the quality of care, and cause doctors and hospitals to cut back, or eliminate, services.

The more we learn about ObamaCare from sources, including the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office, the more we learn how it will damage job creation.

In a recent Fox News poll of American voters, 57 percent said the way ObamaCare is being rolled out is “a joke,” 63 percent said the law needs to be changed, 71 percent believed ObamaCare will increase their taxes, 62 percent believe it will increase the cost of their premiums and 65 percent believe implementing the law will add to the federal deficit.Gallup and Rasmussen Reports polls show similar negativity by American voters concerning ObamaCare’s future impact on their families and the country.

But in his August 17 radio address, the President continued to blame Republicans regarding ObamaCare, rather than accept personal responsibility for the law’s flaws. He said, “A lot of Republicans seem to believe that if they can gum up the works and make this law fail, they’ll somehow be sticking it to me.But they’d just be sticking it to you.”

(Mis)handling of the economy. In a recent Gallup poll of American adults, just 35 percent give the President thumbs up on his leadership regarding the economy. On Townhall.com, columnist Katie Pavlich writes, “While Obama claims America is ‘back,’ 50 million people are on food stamps and 23 million people are unemployed. After claiming the country was on the right track economically, Obama proceeded to blame Republicans for ‘distractions’ and ‘phony’ scandals coming out of Washington.”

Lack of candor on a range of matters. In an ABC/Washington Post poll (in English and Spanish) of American adults, “. . . a vast 74-20 percent see the IRS’ behavior (targeting conservatives) as inappropriate, with most feeling that way strongly -- and 56 percent see it as a deliberate attempt to harass conservative organizations, not a mere administrative error.” The poll also found that “. . . on the attack on the U.S. diplomatic mission in Benghazi, Libya, last fall, suspicions of a coverup rise to a majority, 55 percent. And in this case, only a third of Americans are persuaded that the Obama administration is disclosing honestly what it knows about what occurred.”

Another poll discovery: “Americans by 54-38 percent say they think the government is doing more to threaten the rights of average Americans than to protect those rights. Americans by 69-29 percent in this poll say they’re concerned that in trying to protect classified information the federal government will improperly intrude on the freedom of the press.”

When the President claims that criticisms of him and his policies are partisan and bogus, his attitude can be summed up by another Urban Dictionary definition: of “fuhgeddaboudit.”

1. Forget about it -- the issue is not worth the time, energy, mental effort, or emotional resources.

2. Definitively "no."

3. The subject is unequivocally excellent; further thought and analysis are unnecessary.

Is a president with “Obamanesia” who says “fuhgeddaboudit” serving the best interests of the country? Polls indicate no.





headline: For Obama, denial is a river in Egypt
byline: By Michael Goodwin


That was some lecture President Obama gave on Egypt — if you like high-minded nothingness.

After delivering such platitudes as, “The Egyptian people deserve better,” he planted America squarely on the fence, declaring, “We don’t take sides with any particular party or political figure.”

It’s too late for that. Obama took sides when he rushed to help drive Hosni Mubarak from office in 2011. Egypt had no plan for what would happen next, and the last 30 months revealed the folly behind the idea that democracy springs from instant elections.

While the ultimate choice is Egypt’s, America could have helped midwife a peaceful transition to a broad, civilian government. Instead, as predicted here and elsewhere, the Muslim Brotherhood swept the hasty elections and moved toward Shariah law.

Even as opposition to the Brotherhood spread, Obama was silent. Our ambassador actually dismissed demonstrators and got too cozy with President Mohammed Morsi.

The military coup and the continuing bloodbaths now raise the specter of civil war. Such are the fruits of leading from behind.

Click for Michael Goodwin's complete column in the New York Post.







headline: Mr. Obama, empty threats, hollow promises won't scare Al Qaeda or anyone else
byline: By K.T. McFarland


President Obama's much discussed style of "leading from behind" has led to the United States metaphorically cowering under the bed. So much for President Obama’s claim that “Bin Laden is dead and Al Qaeda is on the ropes.”

Al Qaeda is now in more places around the world and stronger than ever before.

Of course, that's not to say that the latest terror threats to our embassies aren't real. And, of course, they can't and shouldn't be ignored.

But it’s not just Al Qaeda.

Remember that "reset" with Russia? President Putin humiliated Obama time and again -- and got either silence or empty threats in response -- so now he feels free to poke him in the eye by granting NSA leaker Snowden a one year asylum.

We helped topple a dictator in Libya and got Benghazi in return. We failed to track down and punish those killers, and Al Qaeda’s leaders are now emboldened to launch this latest terror plot against Americans from Algeria to Bangladesh.

You don’t need a foreign policy expert to tell you that empty threats and hollow promises don’t work. Just ask any parent of a rebellious teenager.

We pulled the rug out from under another dictator in Egypt, then "led from behind" while opening the door for the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt. Now angry Egyptians are in the streets blaming Obama for the mess Egypt has become.

We led from behind in Syria, too, with empty threats, movable red lines and warnings. Now, after two years of civil war, millions of refugees and hundreds of thousands of dead civilians, we’re arming the Al Qaeda-affiliated rebels.

We’ve alternated threats and entreaties to Iran to halt their nuclear program and now they’ve started developing a whole new line of nukes.

Look, you don’t need a foreign policy expert to tell you empty threats and hollow promises don’t work. Ask any parent of a rebellious teenager. If you don’t make good on the threats, you’re asking for worse behavior next time.

If you say, "come home before dark or I’ll ground you," and he doesn’t and you don’t, the next time he’ll stay out ‘til midnight. And the time after that he’ll sneak out in the middle of the night.

At first the testing is with minor things, to see what they can get away with.But once they realize there are no limits, and there is no point at which you make good on those threats, the defiance ramps up to have real consequences.

Like Iran building nuclear weapons, Syria using chemical weapons, Russia sending warships to Cuba, weapons to Syria and nuclear reactors to Iran. Al Qaeda attacking the twin towers.

Al Qaeda attacked the USS Cole and bombed several U.S. embassies in East Africa in the late 1990’s. We knew who did it but we didn’t go after them. Instead, we beefed up security at our embassies and changed the Navy’s rules of engagement.

It only served to embolden Al Qaeda. New recruits filled their Afghanistan training camps, and new donations filled their coffers. Bin Laden’s June 2001 recruitment video encouraged Muslims to join holy jihad against Americans who wouldn’t fight back. Then we got September 11th.

Look, no one (not even most of the neocons), is urging a return to war in the Middle East. --The Bush administration showed the futility of starting wars that we finish only if we’re willing to come home without victory.

But there is a lot of space between meaningless speeches making threats we won’t carry out and scrambling the jets for wars we can’t win.

But we are where we are. So, how does the U.S. restore our leadership role in the world?

Reagan won the Cold War by first restoring America’s economy and military and then staring down an economically weakened Soviet Union.He knew defeating Russia couldn’t be accomplished without laying the groundwork.

We’re in the same position today. It took us a decade to get into this position, and it will take several years to get us out. It isn’t a quick fix, but it is fixable.

First, approve the Keystone pipeline. Not only is it an immediate boon for job growth and the U.S. economy, it also gives us an incalculable national security advantage.

Once we have energy independence we won’t need Arab oil, and don’t need to be in the middle of the civil wars that have plagued the Middle East for millennia.

Energy independence will be the first step in the U.S. becoming a major energy exporter. That means as Russian oil fields play out and increased instability in the Middle East makes their oil more unreliable, energy importers like China, India and Japan will increasingly look to us for their energy needs.

Second, push back against Putin. Cancel the upcoming Obama-Putin summit which they want more than we need.

Putin wants foreign investment to develop Russia’s non-energy industries and western technology to tap new oil fields to replace the ones that are currently winding down. Make it clear to him that the U.S. will put roadblocks on both unless he changes his attitude and cooperates with us over Iran.

Rethink the missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic, and explore helping Poland develop it’s new natural gas finds.

Third, explain to the Libyan government that either they round up those responsible for Benghazi by noon tomorrow, or we will. Then capture and bring them to justice, as a lesson that if you kill Americans you will be held accountable and punished accordingly.

Sadly, this administration is unlikely to do any of these. They will make tough sounding speeches about how Al Qaeda is in the run, or declare that Putin will face consequences, or that we are hunting down those responsible for Benghazi.

But empty threats are often worse than saying nothing at all.

It’s like leading from behind. Eventually no one thinks you’re leading at all. And after a while, no one is even listening.

That’s when the greatest, strongest, most powerful nation is in the world is reduced to cowering under the bed.





headline: Where was Samantha Power?
byline: By Richard Grenell


For the past several years, President Obama has presided over a U.S. policy on Syria that has made the collective support of the international community a condition of American action.Every answer the President gives on the crisis in Syria includes working thru the United Nations.So when the United Nations Security Council called an emergency meeting on Wednesday about the use of chemical weapons inside Syria, it was perplexing that the newly appointed U.S. Ambassador to the UN was nowhere to be found.

White House Deputy Spokesman Josh Earnest issued a statement on Syria’s use of chemical weapons that emphasized the United Nations as the only U.S. action to the crisis. The President didn’t call for State Department action or a Department of Defense option plan – he only asked for a UN response.

While the White House was pretending to be in urgent mode, the new U.S. ambassador didn’t think the meeting was worth her time.

Earnest said, “The United States strongly condemns any and all use of chemical weapons.Those responsible for the use of chemical weapons must be held accountable.Today, we are formally requesting that the United Nations urgently investigate this new allegation. The UN investigative team, which is currently in Syria, is prepared to do so, and that is consistent with its purpose and mandate. For the UN’s efforts to be credible, they must have immediate access to witnesses and affected individuals, and have the ability to examine and collect physical evidence without any interference or manipulation from the Syrian government.”

So the U.S. policy on Syria is to work thru the United Nations.Where was Samantha Power?

Earnest even emphasized the emergency meeting in his statement: “We have also called for urgent consultations in the UN Security Council to discuss these allegations.”

But while the White House was pretending to be in urgent mode, the new U.S. ambassador didn’t think the meeting was worth her time. Her office reportedly told Reuters that she was on a trip. But to where? What was more important?

Samantha Power has been on the job exactly 19 days.In that time, she’s already traveled from New York to Los Angeles to deliver a speech.Her absence from the UN on Wednesday sends a terrible message at a time when U.S. credibility in the region is suffering.

While the mainstream media continue to describe Power as a “human rights advocate,” the description seems pro forma and disingenuous. Shouldn’t a human rights advocate have to make human rights a priority? When President Obama nominated Power for the UN job, he called her a “relentless advocate for American interests . . .” 

I don’t think a relentless advocate would miss an emergency UN meeting on a chemical weapons attack that killed roughly 1,000 people.







headline: Some final warnings about ObamaCare
byline: By Cal Thomas


Each visit to the U.K. brings new horror stories about the National Health Service (NHS).

Last month, Sir Bruce Keogh, medical director of the NHS, issued a forensic report, commissioned by the government, which found that 14 underperforming hospitals in England had substandard care, contributing to the needless deaths of nearly 13,000 people since 2005. Earlier this year, it was reported that a single hospital in Staffordshire recorded 1,400 "excess" deaths.

Following the July report, letters from patients and relatives of those who died flooded in to newspapers, Sky News and the BBC. Many confirmed poor treatment, if in fact they or their loved ones were able to receive timely care at all. The lack of adequate nursing staff, cuts to elder care budgets and a rise in immigrant populations are a few of the factors that have exacerbated the problem.

Will Americans have to wait weeks, or months, for treatment or surgery, in some cases, risking death?

One letter from Grace Nutt to the Sky News web page is typical: "I am not surprised at the report at all. In fact, the scandal has been going on for longer than the (period from) 2005 the report covers. My daughter was stillborn at Basildon Hospital in 1986. I was ten days overdue and very, very big, and in a lot of distress, but was told go home and come back tomorrow; ‘we don't have enough beds.’ During the night my daughter died. The nurse even told me she could hear the heartbeat the following day. I told her she couldn't and it was confirmed by the doctor. The lack of care has been going on for much longer than stated. I am distressed that I did not at the time take the case further and sue, but it's too late now. I hope everyone in similar circumstances makes them pay. D--n you Basildon Hospital."

Waiting times for many surgeries in the U.K. are notoriously long, but recently have grown longer. The Huffington Post U.K. reports that, according to the NHS' own data, close to 3 million people "were waiting to begin NHS treatment at the end of June, following a referral by their GP." That represents an increase of 240,000 people from the same month last year. The NHS target for treatment following a referral is 18 weeks. The data show 91.7 percent of patients are "seen" within 18 weeks, but being seen and getting surgery or treatment are not the same. After the first appointment, patients often get in another line. Some wait additional weeks or months until a surgeon becomes available. Some die while waiting.

The Daily Telegraph reports the entire system "could collapse within a year without major changes and extra money. Senior doctors likened A-and-E units (accident and emergency) to 'warzones' in May, with medics fighting a losing battle to cope with an increasing tide of patients, while the head of the NHS watchdog said the system had become 'out of control.'"

This is what happens when big, lumbering, inefficient government seeks to provide health care. Why should the U.K.'s horrid experience with NHS matter to Americans? Because if, in a much smaller country, these and other horror stories abound, how much worse could it be when our big, lumbering, inefficient government launches ObamaCare? What impact will it have on U.S. hospitals and health care providers? Instead of merely mandating insurance coverage to the uninsured, will our government eventually begin dictating what surgeries and treatments it will pay for based on what a bureaucrat deems cost-effective? It's only a short step from overseeing health insurance to more intrusive oversight of medical care in general.

Everyone in the U.K. might have access to health care, but they are often forced to accept inferior health care. Will ObamaCare result in Americans patiently waiting 4 1/2 months between a referral and an appointment with a specialist or surgeon? Will Americans have to wait weeks, or months, for treatment or surgery, in some cases, risking death?

With ObamaCare scheduled to begin phasing-in on Oct. 1, in order to avoid what Sen. Max Baucus, D-Mont., has called a "train wreck," these questions need answers.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: It’s the data, stupid -- GOP can't let loyalty and power trump innovation
byline: By John Jordan


Mitt Romney’s loss last November precipitated acknowledgement within the GOP of the vast “digital divide” between the Democratic and Republican parties, and the role it plays in driving election outcomes.

The GOP’s technological shortfalls have been well documented and widely discussed by pundits and political operatives, including the party’s own leadership. In fact, the RNC’s 2012 post-mortem, the “Growth Opportunity Project,” identified a lack of “relevant data and analytics” as a primary reason for Republican losses in 2012.

The term “digital divide” is commonly used to describe the technological disparity between the parties, and I, too, use it for consistency’s sake. But what we saw in 2012 was not a divide -- it was a gaping void. Calling it a “divide” wrongly implies equal knowledge and capability.

Republicans have neither, and thus stick with what they know: outdated, expensive, time-intensive polling, accompanied by “spray and pray” television ad campaigns that have lost their effectiveness in recent years due the rise of DVRs and online television.

I believe the GOP’s power structure magnifies the technological disadvantage the party now suffers.

Today, the vast majority of both Republican Party and SuperPAC dollars are still spent on these old models, rather than on innovative web-based technologies that can help Republicans drive and shape political discourse in real time.

Explanations for the disparity, however characterized, are varied. Some attribute it to a lack of technologists within the GOP, while others point to archaic microtargeting models and a shortage of data crunchers (information specialists who gather insights based on data and statistical models, rather than feelings or intuition).

After analyzing the pre- and post-2012 digital strategies of both parties, I believe the GOP’s power structure magnifies the technological disadvantage the party now suffers.

Furthermore, I agree wholeheartedly with the RNC’s post-election report, which pegged the GOP’s performance gap as more of a “culture problem” than a “technology problem.”

As Harper Reed, Obama’s 2012 campaign chief technology officer, stated in a recent Washington Post article, “You can teach technologists politics. You don’t teach technology to politicians.”

Herein lies the crux of the Republican Party’s problem: the GOP establishment remains unwaveringly loyal to a handful of uber-consultants who raise money by leveraging relationships, rather than investing in the talent and technologies that would enable any consultant—uber or not—to be effective.

Democrats, on the other hand, have relegated most of their fundraising efforts to in-house digital specialists, investing in cutting-edge technologies that enable any activist to become a fundraising force multiplier.

Whereas political consultants in the Democratic world are players, on the Republican side they’re kingmakers.

This self-imposed centralization of power inhibits the “environment of intellectual curiosity” and “culture of data learning” that the RNC calls for in its post-election report.

Ironically, it also prevents free-market principles, so cherished by Republicans, from fostering innovation that would ultimately benefit their party.

This reality also underscores the fundamental difference between Republicans and Democrats in their post-2004 campaign tactics.

Democrats have access to real-time data and feedback from constituents, enabling them to better manage voter contact and shape political messaging.

Republicans do not, and suffer the consequences of pushing messages that are outdated by days, hours, or mere minutes, due to their technological inability to adapt.

Obama’s superiority in the digital communications realm gave his campaigns an advantage in both time (feedback is instantaneous) and space (messages are targeted), resulting in a superior return on investment for his campaign contributors. Unless Republicans make a similar commitment to developing their digital efforts, the existing divide will continue to grow.

There are green shoots of innovation on the Republican side that are operating outside of the political establishment. I’ve invested in some of them myself because as a technologist I know that the establishment is too wedded to centralized control and obsolete modes of communication to engage in the fast-paced world of 21st Century messaging, technology and communication.

Hopefully, the party’s establishment and its “kingmakers” will view emerging technologies not as competition, but as a means of improving their own effectiveness.

Innovation in technology can bridge the digital divide, and give Republicans equal footing in an increasingly data-driven political arena. But in order for this development to take effect, the party’s leadership must recognize the dysfunctional personality trait that holds it back, and take action to change it.

Once the party defines its strategic mission, technologists must be deployed to execute it rather than consultants who remain unaccountable, whether in victory or defeat.





headline: Baseball's druggies must be told -- it's one strike and you're out
byline: By Fay Vincent


The eminent Bart Giamatti—commissioner of Major League Baseball in 1989 before his untimely death—often spoke of why the rules of the game, indeed of all games, are inviolable. Games, he'd say, are defined by rules without which there can be no games. When rules are ignored, the event becomes entertainment and ceases to be a true athletic contest. The result is then professional wrestling or theater—but not sport.

My pal Bart comes to mind whenever I hear about the continuing saga of big-time players violating Major League Baseball's performance-enhancing drug policies or refusing to cooperate with MLB investigations.

Cheating at games—whether it be cycling, baseball, football or track and field—is wrong, and we had better begin to say so.

Yankee superstar Alex Rodriguez and up to a dozen other players are reportedly facing stiff suspensions (a ruling is expected Monday) over their ties to the Biogenesis of America anti-aging clinic. Three 2013 All-Stars could face suspensions of 50 games or more: Texas outfielder Nelson Cruz, San Diego shortstop Everth Cabrera and Detroit shortstop Jhonny Peralta.

Obviously we have learned that those who once dared pronounce—rather more hopefully than accurately—the end of baseball's so-called steroid era were wrong. Perhaps the performance-enhancing drugs being used today are not of the steroid classification, but drugs on the MLB's banned substances list, including human growth hormone, or HGH, are reportedly still being used. Last month, Milwaukee Brewers star Ryan Braun was hit with a 65-game suspension for his involvement with Biogenesis that will end his play for the rest of this season. Last year, Toronto's Melky Cabrera, Oakland's Bartolo Colon and San Diego's Yasmani Grandal were suspended for drug violations.

To continue reading Fay Vincent's column in the Wall Street Journal, click here.





headline: Hasan vs. victims -- Obama White House betrays Ft. Hood heroes
byline: By Jay Sekulow


The Obama administration is turning its back on America’s heroes.

There are few symbols more powerful than the Purple Heart. Whether displayed next to a carefully-folded flag on a mantle, on a fraying old uniform at a veteran’s parade, or even on a license plate designating the driver as “combat-wounded,” the Purple Heart is synonymous with service and sacrifice.

For the families of the slain, Purple Hearts are treasured heirlooms, not only preserving the memory of the fallen but providing deep meaning to their sacrifice, a meaning that harkens back to the Gospel of John: “Greater love hath no man than this, that one lay down in his life for his friends.”

For the combat-wounded living, the Purple Heart is more than a symbol, entitling veterans to health care and benefits a grateful nation provides those who’ve bled in her service.

It is both a moral and practical betrayal that the Pentagon has thus far denied a Purple Heart to the casualties of Hasan’s November 2009 terrorist attack.

So it is both a moral and practical betrayal that the Pentagon has thus far denied a Purple Heart to the casualties of Nidal Hasan’s November 5, 2009 terrorist attack. Hasan murdered 13 people and wounded dozens of others that day.

No credible person can deny that it was, in fact, an act of terrorism. Hasan described himself as a “Mujahideen,” declared that he switched sides in the war, and even communicated with a senior Al Qaeda cleric, the now-deceased Anwar al-Awlaki, prior to the attack.

The National Counterterrorism Center listed the Fort Hood shooting in its 2009 report on terrorism.

But political correctness cares not for facts.

Incredibly, the official military report on the Fort Hood shooting does not even mention Islam.

Just as incredibly, the military classifies the incident not as terrorism but as a mere act of “workplace violence” -- a designation that the Pentagon says prevents it from presenting this treasured award to our military heroes at Fort Hood.

The Pentagon justifies this designation on the grounds that calling Hasan’s attack an act of terror would prejudice his right to receive a fair trial.

As an attorney who’s practiced for more than 30 years in both civil and criminal court, I have a one-word response: Nonsense.

Complete and total nonsense.

There is a simple solution: if the judge is concerned that awarding a Purple Heart would prejudice the trial, then she should exclude evidence of the award.

Juries are required to consider the evidence presented at trial and only the evidence presented at trial.A military jury is more than capable of discharging its duty according to the law.

If evidence of the Purple Heart award or terrorism designation did leak into the trial, then the judge could simply admonish the jury and remind its members that such determinations are made under different standards of evidence and have no bearing on the legal guilt of the accused.

Yet Hasan’s own actions have rendered even these simple cautions moot. Beginning with his opening statement, he confessed responsibility so clearly that a court-designated defense counsel tried to take over Hasan’s defense (Hasan is representing himself), convinced that Hasan is seeking the death penalty.

The stubborn refusal to award Purple Hearts is not the only way that the military is protecting Nidal Hasan’s interests over his victims. Despite the fact that he’s still an active-duty officer in the United States military, he’s been permitted to grow and maintain the jihadist beard that so many members of our armed forces have seen overseas.

This action is a direct insult to the uniform, to the victims, and to the court, yet we don’t even have the strength of will to impose our own uniform standards on a turncoat soldier.

By betraying our own soldiers and bending over backwards to accommodate their betrayer, what do we hope to accomplish? Our enemies sneer at our weakness and exploit our political correctness. In the meantime, our troops suffer the consequences.

Even though our own government denies reality for the sake of political expediency and through political cowardice, we must never forget the heroism and sacrifice of that dreadful day.

As Hasan attacked unarmed soldiers, men and women on the ground responded with extraordinary bravery: shielding casualties with their bodies, rushing Hasan, and using chairs and other objects to try to interrupt his attack. As ordinary citizens, we have no medals we can bestow, but we can give them our gratitude.

We can also give you them voice – a united and loud call for the Obama administration – specifically Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel – to drop the pretense, embrace the truth, and honor the fallen.

It’s past time for Purple Hearts for the casualties and heroes of Fort Hood.





headline: Anne Frank's enduring legacy
byline: By Cal Thomas


AMSTERDAM On the day I visit the Anne Frank House, which is actually the family's hiding place atop Anne's father's business, the wait to get in is as long as three hours. Such is the attraction of this historic site, 53 years after it was opened to the public.

Anne and her family were among an estimated 107,000 Jews deported to concentration camps from The Netherlands during the German occupation in World War II.

Anne's diary has sold more than 30 million copies worldwide and is available in 75 languages. It is not only a testament to the indomitable spirit of a young girl, but a vision of hope in the midst of perhaps the greatest inhumanity in world history.

Anne's diary has sold more than 30 million copies worldwide and is available in 75 languages.

While I have visited several museums and memorials to the Jewish victims of the Holocaust, my first visit to Anne's hiding place was quite different. Her story and that of her family and some friends who eluded the Nazis for two years before they were betrayed by an unknown person, is a living narrative that must be retold to this and future generations.

The timing of my visit coincides with the resumption of "peace talks" between Israel and the Palestinians. Some Palestinian leaders have made statements about Israel in general and Jews in particular that track with Nazi beliefs and propaganda. It is a sober reminder that history can repeat itself.

Anne's appreciation of her culture finds full expression in this diary entry dated April 11, 1944: "God has never deserted our people. Through the ages Jews have had to suffer, but through the ages they have gone on living, and the centuries of suffering have only made them stronger. The weak shall fall and the strong shall survive and not be defeated!"

In the midst of this declaration of strength, there was also her understandable fear of being discovered.

As Anne wrote, also on April 11 after hearing footsteps and noises outside the wall that separated her family from the rest of the building: "That night I really thought I was going to die. I waited for the police and I was ready for death, like a soldier on the battlefield. I'd gladly have given my life for my country. But now that I've been spared, my first wish after the war is to become a Dutch citizen. I love the Dutch. I love this country. I love the language and I want to work here..."

Ultimately she was not spared, but the literary classic she created in the midst of suffering, indeed because of it, has survived.

Anne and her sister, Margot, died of typhus in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp in March 1945, just weeks before liberating British troops arrived. Their bodies were probably dumped in a mass grave.

In a diary entry dated April 4, 1944, Anne wrote, "I want to go on living even after my death." And so she has. Her desire was to be a writer and she succeeded in her short life more than many writers who live a normal lifespan.

Her modest living conditions after the family was forced to move out of their home, is a monument to the power of individual courage and the triumph of good over evil. In her diary, as in her life, Anne Frank is a heroine, a role model, a martyr and a reminder of the power and influence one individual can have.

Anne Frank's life was a candle in the midst of great darkness. Her flame should burn forever.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Memo to America's retailers -- let's stop the silliness about girls and math
byline: By Janice Dean


Like thousands of other moms, I was thankful when The Children’s Place was shamed into taking a few of their girls' T-shirts off store shelves earlier this summer.

The shirts in question displayed some sexist quotes like: “Born to wear diamonds” and a checklist of “my best subjects” with things such as “SHOPPING” and “DANCING” checked off, while the subject of MATH was left unchecked -- with the words “well, nobody’s perfect:”

Even more bothersome? Jane T. Elfers, CEO of The Children’s Place is a woman!

It seems like every year we see stories like this:

- In 2011, J.C. Penny had a T-shirt with these words on it: “We’re too pretty to do homework, so we get our brothers to do it for us.”

When I was a little girl I excelled in math and loved science. I was never told explicitly that girls could not excel in these subjects, but there is a subtle message, nonetheless.

- And then Forever 21 came out with a shirt that declared: “allergic to algebra”

Not cool!

This subject hits home for me, because when I was a little girl I excelled in math and loved science. I was never told explicitly that girls could not excel in these subjects, but there is a subtle message, nonetheless.

When I started getting a little older the message became clearer, at the same time girls gravitated to cheerleading and boyfriends, one high school teacher said in class that boys were just more “natural” when it came to math and science! And I remember all of a sudden thinking that maybe I was weird or odd; so much for science club.

I also remember when we had “career days” in school girls would stay away from picking jobs like engineering or science. And being a CEO of a company? That was unheard of!

Unfortunately, statistics still show that women are still at a disadvantage when it comes to enrolling in subjects that have to do with math and science.

According to a recent report by the Labor Department, in the next ten years, 80 percent of all jobs will require technical skills. And jobs in the science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) fields are expected to grow twice as fast as all jobs.

Unfortunately, despite gains by women, social factors still play a big role in maintaining a gender gap in the science and engineering fields.

And even though we’re starting to see more female doctors and executives on television, it’s still obvious there’s a lot more catching up to do in promoting women in roles that have predominately been a “man’s job.”

I know that as a parent, I’m going to make sure my boys grow up knowing that they can do anything they set their mind to doing.

I will support whatever career path they wish to follow. And if I had a little girl, I would do the same thing my parents did – and that was encourage me to take part in science fairs (I won first prize in Grade 4 and 5!), help with homework and be involved in your children’s classes. Ask questions of your child’s teachers and be aware of what they’re being taught in school.

And in the meantime: Attention children's clothing companies: Get with the program this school year and use your brain to set an example!

For instance, how about some T-shirts that say: “I’m cute, and I’m also great in math and science!”

Or “Born to love algebra!”

How about Classy and Clever in Calculus?

I’d be the first in line asking if they made them in women sizes!





headline: Justice Department should let US Airways  American Airlines merger proceed
byline: By Thomas A. Bowden


This past Valentine’s Day, American Airlines and US Airways announced their intention to merge—but now, six months later, the federal government wants to cancel the wedding.

Unexpectedly, the Department of Justice has filed an antitrust lawsuit to block the merger, citing potential “harm to American consumers.”

The airlines’ merger proposal was based on ten months of intense negotiations in which CEOs dealt with complex relationships among labor unions, bondholders, and other financial stakeholders. If all that ends up in the wastebasket, so do the hopes and plans of American Airlines, which is emerging from bankruptcy, and US Airways, both eager to achieve economies of scale that could help them compete with Delta, United, and Southwest.

Corporations have a moral right to merge without government permission—but in our unfree economy, that right is not legally recognized or protected.

In America, big companies cannot merge without government permission. For the largest firms especially, it’s a tortuous and inscrutable process with no guarantee of success—just ask ATT, which wrote off $4 billion when its planned merger with T-Mobile in 2011 was barred by the Department of Justice.

Conventional wisdom holds that business mergers are not private matters—final authority must rest with antitrust regulators who can monitor, limit, and even forbid mergers and acquisitions that supposedly threaten the economy. Pursuant to the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act of 1976, businesses exceeding a certain size must ask federal permission to merge, and then endure a legal gauntlet to get an answer.

In this “Mother may I?” system, each proposed merger is automatically delayed thirty days—longer if the government requires it—while the DOJ and Federal Trade Commission sift through company documents and emails, compile statistics, run computations, and consult experts. Out of all the proposed mergers subjected to this legal scrutiny, only a select few are blocked. Which ones? Those that promise to be the most successful.

Antitrust enforcers want us to fear that mergers, if left unregulated, would allow large companies to destroy competition and hurt consumers. They use scary terms like “barriers to entry” and “monopoly prices” to paint a dire picture.

Into this dangerous landscape rides the antitrust cavalry, flags flying and guns blazing, offering itself as a brave guardian of economic freedom against rapacious capitalism.

Now let’s switch off this Hollywood movie and look at the facts. So long as government stays out of the picture—that means no protected monopolies, franchises, subsidies, licensing schemes, bailouts, or other forms of coercive favoritism—merging companies have only one avenue to success. They need to offer products and services that people want to acquire through voluntary, win/win transactions.

In a free market, we have nothing to fear from mergers, no matter how big the resulting enterprise. Just as a student cannot be “too smart” or an individual “too healthy,” a business cannot be “too successful” or “too profitable.”

If a particular company offers the most popular smartphones, cars, or airline tickets, then it may come to dominate its market. But no business, whatever its size, can let quality slip or raise prices too far above the cost of production without inviting competition from two sources—existing rivals, and venture capitalists who are constantly searching for opportunities to finance startups.

Regardless of what shape an industry takes, my only right as a customer is to buy or reject the products offered, at the prices offered—and it’s those choices that determine whether any merged company fails or succeeds.

For example, the 1999 merger between Exxon and Mobil enabled the company to streamline operations and combine exploration and production capacities, despite a government-mandated asset selloff. But ExxonMobil’s resulting success comes with no guarantees for the future, if the company lets product quality slip or raises prices to levels that Shell, Chevron, or some oil startup can undercut.

The bottom line is that corporations have a moral right to merge without government permission—but in our unfree economy, that right is not legally recognized or protected.

In March, just a month after American Airlines and US Airways announced their plans, both companies’ CEOs had to bow and scrape before a Senate panel, while the Government Accounting Office sounded warnings of projected changes to the airline industry.

Meanwhile, a New York Times editorial urged the DOJ not to approve the airlines’ merger “without requiring some concessions, like giving up gates and takeoff and landing slots.”

Sure enough, it was soon reported that regulators were holding meetings with the defenseless airlines. We can only surmise that the airlines resisted whatever forms of legalized extortion may have been proposed in those meetings, leading directly to the lawsuit that now threatens to kill the merger.

Antitrust laws deny companies the right to organize their business as they see fit. That’s an injustice we need to identify and condemn, undistracted by the mythical dangers of private mergers.





headline: When the government killed ‘Giggles’
byline: By John Stossel


Global average temperature has been flat for a decade. But frightening myths about global warming continue.

We’re told there are more hurricanes now. We’re told that hurricanes are stronger. But the National Hurricane Center says it isn’t so. 

On "Stossel," my Fox Business TV show, meteorologist Maria Molina said it’s not surprising that climatologists assumed hurricanes would get worse. “Hurricanes need warm ocean waters,” but it turns out that “hurricanes are a lot more complicated than just warm ocean waters.”

Computer models have long predicted nasty effects from our production of greenhouse gasses. But the nasty effects have not appeared. As far as hurricanes, more hit the United States in the 1880s than recently.

When government screws up, we’re supposed to say, “They meant well.”

Why do people believe that global warming has already created bigger storms? Because when “experts” repeatedly tell us that global warming will wreck the Earth, we start to fit each bad storm into the disaster narrative that’s already in our heads.

Also, attention-seeking media wail about increased property damage from hurricanes. And it’s true! Costs have grown! But that’s because more people build on coastlines, not because storms are stronger or more frequent.

Also, thanks to modern media and camera phones, we hear more about storms, and see the damage. People think Hurricane Katrina, which killed 1,800 people, was the deadliest storm ever. But the 1900 Galveston hurricane killed 10,000 people. We just didn’t have so much media then.

Climatologist Patrick Michaels, director of the Center for the Study of Science at the Cato Institute, says humans don’t have as much impact on global temperature as the doomsayers feared.

“Forecasts of global warming -- particularly in the last two years -- have begun to come down,” he says. “We’re seeing the so-called ‘sensitivity’ of temperature being reduced by 40 percent in the new climate models. It means we’re going to live.”

Michaels is tired of dire predictions. “I have lived through nine end-of-the-world environmental apocalypses, beginning with (the 1962 environmental book) ‘Silent Spring,’ and, you know, we’re still here.”

As a consumer reporter, I fell for dire predictions about cellphones, Y2K and pesticides.

Maybe the new scare will be killer bees, flesh-eating bacteria or bird flu. The media always hype something.

Since this is hurricane season, let’s at least debunk one specific myth about preparing for hurricanes: the idea you should use masking tape to put X’s on your windows. Government brochures did recommend that in the 1930s, but now the National Hurricane Center calls it a mistake.

It won’t stop glass from shattering, says Molina, but “now you have larger pieces of glass -- potentially deadlier pieces of glass -- flying around. ... What you should be doing during a hurricane is be in a room with no windows and in a lower part of your home.”

I’m a global warming skeptic not because I don’t believe the world will get warmer. It may. Climate changes. It always has. Man’s carbon output might make it worse.

But just because humans sometimes damage the environment doesn’t mean government is competent to fix the problem. That’s the biggest myth of all.

Government is the same institution that takes over forests to “protect” them -- but then builds logging roads into forests to cut down trees that unsubsidized, private roads might never have reached. The forests end up smaller, but people still assume they’re safer in government hands than in greedy private hands.

Government is the institution that puts itself in charge of caring for wildlife but recently sent a dozen armed agents into a Wisconsin animal shelter to seize and kill a baby deer named Giggles who was being nursed back to health there, since Giggles wasn’t in the right type of approved shelter.

When government screws up, we’re supposed to say, “They meant well.” When individuals pursuing their own interests screw up, we’re supposed to feel ashamed of industrial civilization and let government punish and control us all. If we let it do that, government will do to the economy what it did to Giggles.





headline: Major League Baseball only in first inning of fight against cheating
byline: By Jim Gray


After baseball announced the suspensions of Ryan Braun, Alex Rodriguez and 12 others, fans across the land have been left to sort it all out.

They find themselves somewhere between lost and found.

What they have found is what they suspected for a long time ... that some of the best baseball players of our generation are not playing on a level playing field.

Sadly, an institution that has long held a special place in the hearts of Americans has let us down. Let’s call it for what it is: cheating.

The mantra in many locker rooms across the nation is that if you're not cheating,  you're not trying.

Major League Baseball now joins a long list of established, trusted, stable fixtures in our country that no longer can be counted on to lead the way.

Long known for honor and standards, baseball now regrettably has slipped along with the rest of society, in reflecting a steep decline in character and values. What these players have achieved was not obtained fairly. Be it wins, statistics, awards, or money, it has all come to them in a fraudulent manner.

What we don't have are the indisputable facts, or even a single positive drug test by any of those suspended. This only adds to the confusion.

How can it be that all of these people have cheated, yet none have failed a drug test?

It leaves us all to wonder ... how many more players are sitting out there are dirty, yet continue to play, because the testing system is still several steps behind catching those who are deliberately violating the rules.

Nine years ago at the White House, I asked former team owner and then-President George W Bush if he believed that what he was seeing on the field was real.

His response was that he wasn't sure, but he hoped so, and he wanted to give those playing the benefit of the doubt.

Today, it's clear they no longer deserve any benefit of any doubt. 

Those who have engaged in this dishonesty now unfairly indict a whole group of people who are trying to do it right. It takes the hundreds of players who are innocent, and lumps them together with the few who are guilty, or could be guilty. 

But there’s an even bigger question for the tens of millions of Americans who follow baseball: If the game is no longer authentic,why care about the results? 

For some, this drug usage by players doesn't really concern them ... they simply shrug their shoulders when they hear about performance-enhancing drugs.

Many believe it's just a part of our culture and a part of sports. And therein lies the danger. 

The mantra in many locker rooms across the nation -- and I've personally heard it uttered by many who play, some kiddingly, some not -- is that if you're not cheating, you're not trying.

The “win at all cost” attitude is pervasive. It dominates the landscape – and this is not just about sports.

With careers on the line, so much money to be made,so much glory to be achieved,so much fame to be had,those who initially sought to do it right, end up doing it wrong.

So are we witnessing amazing human athletic achievement and the pursuit of excellence, or are we simply seeing who has the best chemist and who is most proficient at being able to avoid detection? 

Today, we really don’t know. 

For many years, Major League Baseball looked the other way, putting profit ahead of principle, and turned a blind eye to what was going on.

Now the tide may have finally turned. The message from the Commissioner’s office, finally, is that this will no longer be tolerated.

Perhaps it's late, but it also appears that at long last the players are rising up against other players, the union that represents them is getting on board to put an end this, and even the fans are holding the players accountable. 

The problem is, how do you stop this physical cheating when the penalties for an infraction are so light? For the chance to lower your ERA or raise your batting average, there’s still too great an incentive and too few consequences.

Yes, there will be a loss of credibility and reputation for those caught, but the public – and the players -- move on. 

Now it appears that baseball finally sees that it is in peril if this cheating continues. If fans can not trust the outcome of what they are paying for, eventually they will stop turning over their hard earned dollars.

So, forget the moral and ethical aspects, it’s simply about business. Everyone, on all sides understands that. 

Perhaps Former Commissioner Fay Vincent had it right when he said a few days ago that one drug strike and you should be out -- permanently -- banned from the game forever. 

Unfortunately, we are a long way from that happening. As for really cleaning it up, it has taken almost two decades already.

Yes, this was a step forward. But this is only the first inning. Baseball still has a long way to go.





headline: Why I'm calling out civil rights hustlers Sharpton and Dyson
byline: By Juan Williams


Editor's note: The following op-ed is based on a monologue delivered on the July 30, 2013 edition of Fox News Channel's "The Five" and an op-ed that appeared previously in Fox News Opinion.

Race has been the topic over the last couple weeks, but if we're going to do this right, if we're going to have an honest discussion among people who care about the problems inside the black community, we have to be dealing with honest brokers. Unfortunately, a lot of people in the so- called civil rights community are frauds, outright hucksters.

Two of the worst: civil rights activist and MSNBC host Al Sharpton and Georgetown University Professor Michael Eric Dyson. Their goal: demonize white people, especially conservatives like Bill O'Reilly, so they don't have to deal with the real problems that continue to plague the black community. Making an older, conservative white guy like O'Reilly a boogie man is easy for these hustlers.

If you truly love people, and want to help those in need, how does it help to go after conservatives, Bill O'Reilly and other white people, rich people?

But do they ever confront the real problems and threats in the minority community? No. 
High murder rates? How about that? What about high dropout rates? What about the breakdown of the family?

I bet you think I'm exaggerating. Well, here’s this from Michael Eric Dyson:

“Why is it that when we say we want to have a conversation on race, you want a conversation on blackness? You don't want to have a conversation on race. You don't want to have a conversation on white privilege, unconscious bias. You don't want to talk about the collective world we made as black, brown, red, yellow and white people. You want to lecture black people.

So, Mr. O'Reilly, I'd love to have that conversation about protecting yourself behind white picket fences and Fox News and having digital courage. Come in the streets where you went to Sylvia, and you were surprised that black people don't throw bananas at each other or swing from trees.”

Can you believe that? This is unbelievable on so many levels. But let me just start by saying this: Dyson is making the charge basically that O'Reilly is portraying black people as animals. And, of course, this never happened. This is not true.

In the whole episode (when he visited Sylvia's restaurant), which O'Reilly and I talked about on the radio, was going on about defeating racial stereotypes in this society. But that's not what Michael Eric Dyson wants to do here. He wants to hold up somehow that Bill O'Reilly is a racist and target of the conversation and therefore we should be about, somehow, going after Bill O'Reilly.

Well, who does that help? Let's think about that for a second. If this is a real conversation about helping people, if you truly love people, and want to help those in need, how does it help to go after conservatives, O'Reilly, white people, rich people? Let's go to the people who need help and give them help.

But that's not what Michael Eric Dyson is doing. Oh, no. When you start asking questions like well, are you doing anything to help the schools in the inner-city? No. 

What about the carnage on black streets with kids shooting each other? No.

What about, you know, any of the issues attached to family breakdown, 70 percent of children born out of wedlock? What about that? No.

So what we're doing here is a huge distraction. Yes, there's legitimate rage in the black community over the Zimmerman verdict, but the idea that we have to use the power that exists in this country to help people who are in need in the black community, that is an ongoing and longer story and you can't pull away from that by making Bill O'Reilly into your target and somehow beating him up. That's craziness.

So what can we do, what should we do to start helping people who are in need in the African-American community today? I wrote about this in my book, “Enough” and recently in an opinion piece for FoxNews.com.

Here’s the message I would like to see expressed in America today. I think it would be especially powerful if it could come from the black man with the highest level of credibility in black America since Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. – President Obama.

1. Stay in school and graduate from the highest level of school – but absolutely, no excuses, graduate from high school.

2. Take a job and hold it, no matter what job, no matter if your friends put you down for ‘flipping burgers.’ Use the job to get experience, make contacts with business people, and build a resume.

3. Marry after you have finished your education and while you have a job.

And the final step is important for you and for the future of your family and your community:

4. Don’t have children until you are at least 21-years-old and married.

Imagine if President Obama repeated that message over and over, ignoring the phonies who want to focus only on “systemic” racism as the reason for high rates of poverty, involvement with crime, and incarceration among black men.

Imagine if the president delivered that message despite attempts to intimidate him by civil rights leaders.

Imagine if he decided to deliver that message and by-passed the so-called ‘racial experts’ and academics who prefer to look at America’s troubled racial history – slavery and legal segregation.

The answer is the president could make a difference in millions of lives and build a legacy on par with Dr. King.

Mr. President it is your move.





headline: Obama gambled on Kerry, ElBaradei partnership and lost America’s credibility
byline: By Richard Grenell


Secretary of State John Kerry spent the last few weeks believing that U.S. policy in Egypt would best be served by negotiating with Interim Vice President Mohamed ElBaradei, the former United Nations diplomat from Vienna who resigned his post after just 30 days, said a senior U.S. State Department official in Cairo.

“ElBaradei was the wrong guy to negotiate with, but ‘S’ believed he would be able to convince Mansour and [General] Sisi. State worked almost exclusively through the guy that ended up resigning after 30 days on the job,” said the official, denoting Secretary Kerry with the State Department’s standard, “S” referral.

While Kerry instructed State Department officials to focus on appealing to the former UN official-turned-failed-presidential candidate, the U.S. Department of Defense officials dealt with General Sisi, the top military official. Senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham flew to Egypt and met with Sisi in early August for what one official described to me as “an early attempt to show the U.S. was united.” Following the meeting and in the eight days leading up to the August 14 eruption of sectarian violence, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel reportedly called Sisi upwards of 11 times to try and calm the situation while Kerry continued to work ElBaradei. Neither was successful in their efforts.

Yet the Obama administration pressed on -- or rather, failed to press on with their diplomatic strategy of going through ElBaradei. President Obama and the first family began their eight-day vacation to Martha’s Vineyard on August 10 believing the Secretary Kerry-VP ElBaradei gamble would work. Though it was clear by the time Obama finished his first round of golf that Kerry’s strategy was failing, the President decided to stay with the Kerry plan. National Security Adviser Susan Rice, too, waited for Kerry.

The same U.S. official in Cairo said, “DoD was trying to convince General Sisi. I didn’t see the NSC very active. They deferred to the Kerry-ElBaradei discussions and that proved to be a huge mistake. They blew it by believing in ElBaradei.”

Most U.S. officials and commentators, however, knew (and even publicly stated) that the former Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency was too new to popular politics to be effective. ElBaradei was more comfortable discussing Egypt’s future in a Viennese café than in the streets of Tahrir Square, and his failed presidential campaign was never able to garner the mass support of even those with whom he most closely aligned.

James Poulos, writing in Forbes, stated as early as July 6: “It’s very hard to see how much traction he could get as the voice of a new era in Egyptian politics. He’s running plays from a liberalization playbook that’s decades old — not just pre-Arab Spring, but pre-9/11, pre-Internet.”

Yet Obama trusted the long-time friendship of Kerry and ElBaradei. Then-Sen. Kerry and ElBaradei spent years discussing how best to block the George W. Bush administration’s policies on Iraq, Iran and North Korea during ElBaradei’s tenure at the IAEA. ElBaradei even helped former Sen. Kerry during his failed 2004 presidential campaign against then-President Bush by publicly confronting the U.S. president on several foreign policy fronts from his UN seat. Shockingly, on Oct. 25, 2004, just days before the U.S. presidential election between Kerry and Bush, ElBaradei was accused of trying to influence the U.S. elections in favor of his friend John Kerry by releasing a UN report on missing weapons in Iraq, a report ElBaradei held for weeks.

The two former failed presidential candidates thought they were finally leading the countries they love this week. For a few days, it must have felt like old times for the diplomats as they sat scheming Egypt’s future together. It’s just too bad that President Obama allowed Kerry and ElBaradei another shot at what was clearly a diplomatic waste of time.





headline: The tragedy of America's great food stamp binge
byline: By Patrick Caddell


Let me put it this way, my jaw hit the floor.Earlier this week I was able to screen a portion of this Friday’s Fox News documentary “The Great Food Stamp Binge,” hosted by Bret Baier.It airs Friday at 10 p.m. and Sunday at 9 p.m. ET on the Fox News Channel. This investigation focuses on a federal program called SNAP, or "Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program."

Once upon a time this was called food stamps, but the modern world is all about branding and image, not accuracy or substance. Thus, a snappy new name was needed.

All this change is a direct result of the Obama administration's surreptitious undermining of the law in the Stimulus Act in 2009and the disingenuous gutting of President Clinton's overwhelmingly successful Welfare Reform law. This was achieved by administrative fiat in 2010.

As I watched the rough cut with Fox Editor-at-Large Peter Boyer, I found myself at a loss for words.

I don’t know whether I was more saddened, or angered by the interview John Roberts did with an apparently healthy “surfer” who happily lives a life of leisure in Southern California subsidized by the taxpayer.

It was simply mindboggling to listen to this grown man explain the logic he uses to justify taking food aid -- and thus free food -- rather than working and paying for it himself.

This great government giveaway is being undertaken and I can’t help but believe those that truly need help are still going hungry.

As we continued to watch I began to see what was behind the SNAP program. It is about changing the mentality of the nation, of Americans.

Take this example, from "The Great Food Stamp Binge," of what is nothing short of social engineering or reeducation. In North Carolina social workers actually got an award for breaking down the “Mountain Pride” that makes some from that state reluctant or unwilling to take handouts. They actively fought the tradition of tightening your belt and taking care of yourself when times get tough.

There is much more in this excellent program -- it is a thought provoking, well told story and I urge you to watch it.

Certainly, there are many in this country, who need the help. The idea that Americans go to bed hungry or get sick due to malnutrition is one that should appall any morally sound man or woman.And that is what makes the SNAP initiative utterly foul.

After watching I realized why I was angered by those who take, but don’t need, and frustrated for those who are given, but don’t want. This great giveaway is being undertaken and I can’t help but believe that those that truly need help are still going hungry.Millions of tax dollars are going to people who aren’t our neediest, it is a disgrace.

Many of you have probably heard the Chinese proverb, “Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime.” The SNAP program is one big fish giveaway that leaves people reliant rather than reliable. The government is on a mission to sign people up – one in seven in this country already receive food stamps -- and the taxpayer is footing the bill for, what I believe, is a tragically misguided plan.



Patrick Caddell is a Democratic pollster and Fox News contributor. He served as pollster for President Jimmy Carter, Gary Hart, Joe Biden and others. He is a Fox News political analyst and co-host of "Political Insiders" Sundays on Fox News Channel and Mondays at 10:30 am ET on "FoxNews.com Live."



headline: We must remember why our money says 'In God We Trust'
byline: By Kelly Wright


Encouragement is oxygen for the soul. -- John Maxwell

"People often say that motivation doesn't last. Well, neither does bathing -- that's why we recommend it daily." -- Zig Ziglar

Encouragement and motivation are like the air we breathe: everybody needs it. The lack of it causes us to wallow in a life of dwarfed dreams and shallow visions.

An encouraging word inspires us to keep our focus on faith, hope and love for the future. A discouraging word can rob, steal and kill our ability to overcome the obstacles that confront us.

That's what concerns me about the state of America right now. We are in short supply of encouragement.

There are numerous reports about America's collective mood. Most of them show that Americans are feeling pessimistic about their future. The findings from a recent Rasmussen Reports telephone survey reveal that nearly half (49%) of voters think America's best days are buried in the past.

Americans are fed up, put out, and sick and tired of being sick and tired.

The summer of 2013 may be described as the summer of discontent in America. We are not satisfied with the way things have become.

We still struggle with a sluggish economy, unemployment, and what seems to be ineffective leadership from Washington.

Americans are fed up, put out, and sick and tired of being sick and tired.

Congress is now on summer recess. Members of Congress will spend the next five weeks in their home districts. Hopefully, they will enjoy some quality time with their families. They deserve to have that kind of time to draw closer to their families.

Also, they will spend time meeting with their constituents and that's where things might get dicey. Congressional lawmakers will likely see and hear the discontent of America when people express their concerns about a myriad of issues such as, the Affordable Care Act better known as ObamaCare, immigration reform, taxes and more.

Each member of Congress fully understands what the American people think of their job performance.

Pardon my poor English but the approval rating of Congress "ain't good!" A recent Gallup poll records an historic low of 10 percent.

For that matter, Americans are also displeased with President Obama. His approval numbers continue to slide downward, now at 46-percent.

American corporations, Wall Street and even "we the people" are at odds on what to do to get our house in order.

May I suggest that we consider a different approach? Let's begin by looking at the inscription on the money we use. It says: "In God We Trust."

Most of the founding fathers of this great nation trusted in God. They looked beyond themselves to build the foundation of America.

They desired to shake off the tyranny of Great Britain, so they turned to God for guidance through perilous times.

Benjamin Franklin once wrote; “The longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth, that God governs in the affairs of men. And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without His notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without His aid?”

Rear Admiral Barry Black (ret.) is chaplain of the U.S. Senate. He says America is in desperate need of prayer. He boldly declares that godliness is an national security issue.

Through the power of prayer, he says we can find the encouragement we need to deal with the daunting challenges we face.

One thing that warms his heart and should be encouraging to all of us is a quote from God who says to the prophet Jeremiah; "For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of disaster, to give you a future and a hope."

Be encouraged America. God has a remedy for your discontent as he states in 2 Chronicles 7:14; "If my people who are called by my name would humble themselves, seek my face and pray. Then from heaven I will hear their prayer, forgive their sin and heal their land."





headline: Why millennials will inherit the Earth and return to the Church
byline: By John Carter


Shortly before my twenty-fifth birthday my wife and I started a non-denominational church in the living room of our rented duplex just off the campus of Syracuse University. Eleven people attended our first service.

Twenty-three years later we have the privilege of pastoring a church of over 3,300 members that enjoys the distinction of being one of the most racially diverse congregations in the America.

When our church first began, we wanted to be a part of a revolution.

We wanted to reach the un-churched twenty-somethings of our generation.

We wanted to build a church that would transcend the barriers of race, economics, and social status.

We wanted to change the world.

As a “revolutionary” it just never occurred to me that my very cool church might not connect with my own kids.

So, we built a new kind of church designed to bring the timeless message of scripture and the presence of Jesus to our generation.

We built buildings designed to reach families and accommodate crowds.

We built a coffee shop and a bookstore in our lobby, a café for our young adults, and Disneyesque programming for our children.

We spend hundreds of thousands of dollars every year to feed the hungry in our community, provide job programs for urban youth, and operate a medical center in an impoverished region of Western Kenya.

I think it is fair to say that our ministry has had a transformational impact in our community and made a difference in the world. It came as rude awakening to discover that my transformational church might need some transformation itself.

As a “revolutionary” it just never occurred to me that my very cool church might not connect with my own kids.

I recognize in my millennial kids many of the same frustrations that I felt as a twenty something about the evangelical churches I grew up in.

It is the same hunger I saw in my twenty-something parents that motivated them to leave the mysterious rituals of the old European cathedrals for a vibrant contemporary faith that made sense of the world they lived in.

As a witness to the charismatic renewal of the 60’s, the rise of Evangelicalism in the 70’s and 80’s, and the media/mega-church movements of the past three decades, I have a perspective that allows me to both critique and defend. I have watched the dance between church and culture – sometimes holding each other tight and dancing slowly, while at other times behaving as rivals in a hip hop dance off.

The church will always face this conflict. After all, we are called to both love the world and change the world. We are called to embrace all people while simultaneously calling them to abandon sin and live a better life.

The church is assigned to carry a message that calls everyone to transform, to live above the shifting preferences of culture, the rebellion of youth, and the prejudices of the aging.

I am fully persuaded that it is the message of scripture itself that heals, delivers, confronts, and transforms, not the methods we employ to deliver it.

Our evangelical and charismatic churches have grown because of the power of our message.

While our churches have experimented with countless methods of delivering the message of the Bible, we are at our best when our methods demystify, clarify, and connect people with its message – not obscure or apologize for it.

The Gospel comforts and convicts. It exposes the lies that our culture teaches while calling us to responsible living.

Its teaching about human sexuality is just as important and relevant as its teaching about materialism, justice, the stewardship of the earth, and peace.

What is says, it has always said. And it’s the church’s job to explain it, not change it to make it easier to swallow.

While each generation must apply its teaching to the challenges they face, the church does not exist so much to reflect the ever-shifting preferences of culture, but to speak to them in fresh ways. It is not the message of the church that must change, but the methods and manner employed to deliver it—clutter free—to each generation.

Our current twenty-somethings are indeed a special lot. But after talking with hundreds of them and listening to their desires and fears I am convinced that they are not so unlike the generations before them.

They are looking for more than a church that will affirm their lifestyles and approve a particular political agenda.

They want to be challenged to think, live, and experience a power that is greater than themselves.

We became evangelicals because the spontaneous worship, confrontational preaching, and calls to sacrificial living felt real, authentic, and relevant.

We wanted to hear the Bible taught and experience the presence of Jesus for ourselves.

Our church is working on a quiet revolution. We are talking to our millenials, understanding their passions and making room for their gifts and service contributions.

My sons want to see more of their generation reflected in leadership, in our worship, and at our planning table. They want to be seen, understood and useful. And frankly, we need them.

So, we are opening our hearts in new ways and discovering new methods to call this generation to live the Gospel, without apologizing for what it says.

I don’t know how many millennials will return to our church. My experience tells me that many of them will show up sometime in their early 30’s – somewhere between marriage and the birth of their first child. When I pray I hear their imminent footsteps.

But we are not waiting. We are adapting. We are preparing to hand the church over to a generation of revolutionary twenty somethings.

These much-studied millennials will inherit the Earth as well as the Kingdom of God. And someday, sooner than they could ever imagine, they will be confronted with the challenge of how to deliver a revolutionary message to a generation of children who will be looking for a revolution of their own.





headline: Will Friday's jobs report bring hope or hurt to Americans?
byline: By Peter Morici


Friday, forecasters expect the Labor Department will report the economy added 175,000 jobs in July, down from 195,000 in June. They also expect the unemployment rate to slip a notch to 7.5 percent.

The pace of jobs creation has been stronger in recent months; however, a noticeable shift toward replacing full-time workers with part-time employees masks a much tougher market for job-seekers. Since January, 833,000 more Americans reported working part-time, while 97,000 fewer have full time positions.

This is not surprising—a good deal of the new jobs are in the hospitality, retailing and other sectors where businesses may chop up full-time positions to avoid rising heath insurance costs for full-time employees mandated by ObamaCare.

A noticeable shift toward replacing full-time workers with part-time employees masks a much tougher market for job-seekers.

More part-time workers pushes down wages for ordinary workers and is one particularly poignant illustration of a public policy initiative intended to reduce income inequality that actually exacerbates it.

Under more normal circumstances about 360,000 additional jobs would be needed each month to pull down headline unemployment to 6 percent, but to attain a truly healthy labor market many more full time jobs are needed.

Adding in discouraged adults and part-timers who want full-time positions, the unemployment rate becomes 14.3 percent.

Slow growth is the ultimate factor behind income disparities.

In the second quarter, GDP was up only 1.8 percent, and has averaged a paltry 1 percent since President Obama’s reelection.

Despite greater optimism expressed by consumers in sentiment surveys, real consumer spending, net of autos, has softened. $200 billion in higher taxes imposed at the beginning of the year dwarf sequester spending cuts and have severely limited consumer spending on nonessentials.

Businesses remain quite pessimistic and are not investing, dragging down growth. Obama’s proposal to tighten up and raise corporate taxes for more jobs programs—especially given the poor record of his targeted initiatives in alternative energy and vehicles—only adds to investor skepticism.

Long-term, the president’s proposal to further tax overseas corporate earnings, when other principal nations do not, will motivate more firms to move corporate headquarters and jobs to Ireland and other low-tax jurisdictions. Eaton, Sara Lee and many less well-known companies have already done so.

Major factors contribute to the slow pace of recovery. These include the huge trade deficits on oil and manufactured products from China, Japan and elsewhere in Asia. And these in turn slow demand for U.S. goods and services.

Absent U.S. policies to effectively confront Asian governments about their purposefully undervalued currencies, and to develop more oil offshore and in Alaska, the trade deficit will continue to tax growth.

An artificially cheap yen will eventually undermine the auto-sectors recovery. It raises Japanese auto makers net on new cars by at least $2,000, which they can pour into incentives, more features and product development. T

he latter will have particularly insidious consequences for Detroit’s ability to compete in the emerging hybrid and electric segments.

The recent surge in natural gas production, and accompanying lower prices, improves the competitiveness of energy-using industries like petrochemicals, fertilizers, plastics, and primary metals—as well as their consuming industries like industrial machinery and building materials.

However, Department of Energy efforts to boost exports of liquefied gas will reduce the trade deficit and boost growth much less, and create many fewer jobs, than keeping the gas in the United States for use by energy-intensive industries.

Dodd-Frank regulations make mortgages, refinancing, and home improvement loans much more difficult to obtain. The recovery in housing construction, though welcomed, remains lackluster as compared to past recoveries. 

The high cost and slow pace of regulatory reviews are a constant complaint among businesses and dampen investment spending—and Washington shows no signs of listening.

Government needs to subject policies designed to protect the environment and other regulatory goals to the same efficacy standards the market applies to commercial technologies—regulatory assessments and enforcement are needed but those must be delivered cost effectively and quickly to add genuine value.

Bottom line: without better trade, energy, tax, health care, and other regulatory policies, stronger growth and the creation of enough good jobs are simply not going to happen.





headline: Why Cory Booker's cozy relationship with Silicon Valley is bad for New Jersey
byline: By Phil Kerpen


The bulk of Senate candidate and Newark Mayor Cory Booker’s personal wealth, according to a blockbuster New York Times expose, comes from a previously unknown company called Waywire, which styles itself as a “socially conscious” alternative to YouTube.

Waywire counts Oprah Winfrey, Google CEO Eric Schmidt, and Lady Gaga’s manager Troy Carter among its investors, but the tiny company (2,207 total visitors in June compared to YouTube’s 160 million) looks more like a multimillion dollar gift to Cory Booker than a real business.

Booker claimed last year he would have no role in directing the site’s content, which makes it odd that so many of the videos on Waywire feature Booker.

It’s almost like the whole thing is a backdoor vehicle to promote Booker’s campaign for the U.S. Senate and funnel money to him personally. And until Thursday, the 15 year-old son of CNN president Jeff Zucker was on the company’s advisory board (complete with stock options), perhaps to ensure favorable coverage from that network.

You have to wonder how, if elected, Booker could possibly make important decisions about privacy and technology policy in an unbiased fashion in the United States Senate.

Given Schmidt’s involvement, it’s reasonable to speculate the plan was for Google, the parent company of YouTube, to buy out Waywire and provide Booker with a massive windfall at some point in the future.

You have to wonder how, if elected, Booker could possibly make important decisions about privacy and technology policy in an unbiased fashion in the United States Senate, knowing his financial future depends on his Waywire stake and a potential payday from Google.

For now the low-traffic website serves principally to bring together Booker and his big money backers at headquarters located just a block from Wall Street and the New York Stock Exchange.

That’s right: would-be Jersey senator Cory Booker put his company in New York City – even though he once told the Times that he sees Newark as “the Silicon Valley of social entrepreneurship.”

Other than videos of Cory Booker, the only notable niche tiny Waywire has developed is extreme anti-Semitic videos. When the Washington Free Beacon broke that story back in March, Waywire responded: “We are now evaluating the videos in question. We take these matters very seriously.” Five months later, anti-Semitic videos are still rampant on the site.

The New York Times, whose editorial page writers seem intent on ignoring the excellent investigative reporting from their colleagues on the news side, endorsed Booker and touted his close ties to big money from Silicon Valley, Hollywood, and Wall Street. The Times actually called “his coziness with the moneyed class” an asset.

Why? Because Newark supposedly benefited from it when Booker’s buddy Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg donated $100 million to Newark schools. The Times neglected to mention that on Christmas Eve, when he thought nobody was looking, Booker finally complied with a court order and released documents showing that none of the Zuckerberg money is being spent in the classroom. And Newark schools continue to fail.

And while Booker used his connections to get himself fancy offices in the heart of New York’s financial district, his “economic development” approach – corporate welfare to lure in big corporations – has failed in Newark.

When Booker took office, 20 years of Sharpe James and his cronies running the city had unemployment at an unacceptably elevated 8.5 percent; after seven years of Cory Booker, it now stands at 14.4 percent. The number of unemployed Newarkers jumped over that period from 8,892 to 15,744 – a shocking 77% increase.

While Panasonic and others got property tax abatements, small businesses around Newark were being shocked with massive property tax appraisal increases.

If the editorial page writers at the Times had read their own paper back in March, they would have known that companies like Ivo Fernandes’s mechanic shop and Pedro Nogueira’s Portuguese restaurant saw their property tax appraisals double and triple. Jose Breda, who owns a 6-unit apartment building whose valuation more than doubled told the Times: “They are robbing the people.”

This from a mayor who in 2011 was delinquent on his own taxes to the tune of $2,820, while gearing up with his rich friends for the multimillion-dollar launch of Waywire.

In 2010, Booker laid off 167 police officers (despite a 20 percent increase in property taxes) and triggered a spike in violent crime, which is up 24 percent from 2009 to 2012.

Newark schools are still failing.

Unemployment in his city is a tragic 14.4 percent.

Yet Newark Councilman Ras Baraka famously said “the only way you can see the mayor is if you turn on 'Meet the Press'" – because Booker is off running for higher office with the financial help of his Waywire buddies and a complicit liberal media that cares more about image – and “coziness” – than reality.





headline: Don't be fooled, today's women rarely victims of salary discrimination
byline: By John Stossel


Women make only 77 cents per each dollar made by males. Outrageous! Sex discrimination! So say advocates of government-enforced “equality.”

But they are wrong. Women today are rarely victims of salary discrimination. If they were, market competition would punish bosses who discriminate.

A company that hired women who were “underpaid” by other companies would have a cost advantage, allowing them to lower prices, and they’d quickly take business away from the “sexist” competition. Since those female workers provide the same value for less, entrepreneurs who hired only women would get rich!

Women are more likely to choose a well-rounded life than their workaholic male peers.

Warren Farrell, author of “Why Men Earn More,” dug deeper into reasons why women are paid less and found that it’s women who make discriminating choices. Women are more likely to choose a well-rounded life than their workaholic male peers.

“Many women say, what do I want? Do I want to make $200,000 a year, or do I want more personal time? Time with my children? More spiritual time?”

He found that even female business owners are more likely to favor flexibility and proximity to home. Men are more likely to chase higher earnings by working longer hours, traveling farther and taking dangerous assignments. They are paid accordingly, though they may not be happier.

In her recent book, “Lean In,” the chief operating officer of Facebook, Sheryl Sandberg, urged women to put in the extra effort that enables workers to jockey for position in business.

She says: “At Facebook, we hosted a senior government official, and he had these two women traveling with him who were pretty senior in his department. And I said to them, sit at the table, come on, sit at the table. [But] they sat on the side of the room.”

Sandberg’s been criticized by feminists for this common-sense message. The critics claim she “blames the victim.” But most women are anything but victims. Making a different choice, choosing a less career-driven life, may be why women have more friends and live longer.

Many women don’t want “corporate success,” though it’s politically incorrect to admit it, says Sabrina Schaeffer, executive director of the Independent Women’s Forum.

“I don’t think that most women want what Sheryl Sandberg wants,” Schaeffer said on my show. “In some recent studies, only 23 percent of women said that they would prefer to work full-time, let alone (have the) sort of CEO quality of life that Sheryl Sandberg is living.”

Regardless of what many women prefer, America now is stuck with laws based on a feminist view that only discrimination accounts for differences between women and men -- and that government must use regulation to “correct” those differences: affirmative action, subsidies for female-owned businesses, Title IX rules that require equal money for women’s college sports, etc.

Instead of trying to change sexist male institutions by force, Sandberg’s book suggests that women change voluntarily.

“Sandberg picks up on some very sensitive gender differences,” says Schaeffer. “She says, look, women don’t negotiate their salaries. I was one of those women. My brother told me he negotiated every salary he had. The fact is, once you’re aware of that, you can do things.”

If they do, women might very well overtake men in business -- but they will have to give something up to do it.

Psychiatrist Dr. Daniel Amen, author of “The Power of the Female Brain,” conducted the biggest brain-scan study ever done -- 46,000 scans -- and found that “female brains were dramatically more active. Women are really wired for leadership. ... If it wasn’t for this thing called children that derails their careers ... they really make great CEOs.”

Amen says women are “better with things like empathy, intuition, collaboration, self-control.” Since leadership isn’t all about bellowing and frightening people, those are useful corporate skills.

They are also useful skills for managing a household full of children and promoting family life. We should respect both choices.

Politicians and “equality” feminists should respect reality: Differing choices come with differing rewards -- and different salaries.





headline: Let's not play racial politics when the bigger problem is violent criminal behavior
byline: By Juan Williams


In a sharp political divide separating liberals and conservatives, the shooting death of an Australian man by three teenage boys in Oklahoma is being advertised by the right as a race crime.

There are two problems with that theory.

First, the boys who committed this atrocity are black, white and biracial.

Second, there is no evidence that racism motivated their mindless assault. Apparently these were three bored teenagers with a gun. They wanted to prove their manhood, be initiated into a gang or just stir up life by proving how tough and crazy they can be.

That is the real tragedy here.

But that is not enough for some people who are intent on playing racial politics with the story.

The focus on race in this story among some on the right comes from a desire to pay back left-wingers who insist the shooting of Trayvon Martin was a racist act.

The same tit-for-tat racial appetite was on view earlier this month after a video emerged of three black teenage boys savagely beating a younger white boy on a school bus in Gulfport, Fla.

The victim has told authorities that the three boys attacked him because they tried to sell him drugs and he reported them to teachers at his school. 

What is being lost here is the larger problem of criminal behavior, gun violence, random murder

In that case, the young white man did exactly the right thing by reporting the criminal behavior to the school. He should not be labeled a “Narc.” And he most definitely did not deserve what happened to him. The young man should be applauded for having the courage to come forward. If more young people of all colors did what he did, our schools and communities would be much safer.

But most people do not step up because they fear exactly this kind of violent reprisal from the criminals -- some black, some white, some Hispanic and some of every other color. But all criminals.

But, again, there is no evidence that the attack was racially motivated.

What is being lost here is the larger problem of criminal behavior, gun violence, random murder – most often among people of the same race and especially black on black. Those daily, ongoing tragedies in our nation never get the attention of the civil rights leaders or the loud voices on the right wing because those stories do not serve their political agenda.

Instead, the tragedies that generate their selective anger are stories that, in the case of the right-wing, put civil rights leaders and left-wing media on the defensive.

In the case of the left wing, and much of the media, the Martin shooting fits their preferred narrative of blacks as victims. It plays to charges of racial profiling, stereotyping of young black people as criminals, and reminds people of the nation’s damaging days of slavery and lynching.

Yes, there is a media bias and double standard for coverage of racially-charged crimes.

The liberal media did not cover the bus incident because it was black-on-white violence and therefore did not fit their outdated world view of an America still being plagued by white-on-black violence. Most racial violence in American history is white on black violence – from the abuse of slave masters, to lynching, to KKK bombs and assassination of black leaders.

Today too many in the mainstream media do not report on black-on-white crime or even black-on-black crime because it disrupts the liberal narrative of African Americans as victims and whites as the historical perpetrators of racial crime.

The thinking is if Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton don’t hold protests over it, it must not be a major issue or a real problem for the black community.

Instead of focusing on the damage done to the nation by drug culture, family breakdown, pornographic movies, music and bad schools, some politicians among us are distracted by the race of the boys involved. In both the Oklahoma murder story and the Florida bus story the political attention is the result of lingering anger on the right over charges of white racism in the Martin killing.

So, let’s be honest about the political game being played with this tragedy. It is a cynical, dangerous game of one-upping the other side by claiming those other folks are the real racists.

When will the political activists on the right and left work up their righteous anger over the real heart of the problem?

They should be in the streets demanding that all Americans do something about the breakdown of the family in America, especially in minority communities.

More than 70 percent of black children are born out of wedlock, as are more than 50 percent of Hispanic children and 30 percent of white children.

The research is clear – these students are much more likely to be at risk of dropping out of school, getting in trouble with the law and abusing drugs and alcohol.

Republicans and Democrats should be in the streets about rap music and movies that celebrate ‘Thug Life’ and that brag about how many people the hero has killed, how many women he has impregnated and how much money he has piled up from his criminal life.

For too long the problem has been excused and ignored by the liberal mainstream media, which desperately clings to the narrative that the biggest problem affecting minority communities in America is systemic racism and white racism. 

Race still divides us, but let’s not lose sight of the larger context for this case.

According to a report by the U.S. Department of Education released in March 2012, blacks make up 18 percent of the country’s public schools, yet they accounted for 35 percent of students suspended at least once and 39 percent of students expelled. The Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice reports that 58 percent of the young people in state prisons are African Americans.

The Irish political philosopher Edmund Burke once said, “all that is necessary for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.”

There is an urgent need for people of good will -- of all races -- to take back our communities from the thugs, the gangbangers, the drug dealers and the pornographers.

The young man in Florida is a hero for standing in the way of drug dealing instead of being intimidated and keeping his mouth shut. I am sorry that he was attacked, but I am glad that he did not stay silent. He understands the real fight going on in our nation and it has little to do with the political fight between left and right about which group has the worse racists.









headline: IRS scandal hits 3 month mark -- where's the accountability, Mr. Obama?
byline: By Jay Sekulow


Saturday, August 10 marks the third month of the IRS scandal.

On May10, when Lois Lerner, the former Director of the IRS Exempt Organizations Division, answered a question at a legal conference – a question she arranged to have asked in advance -- she clearly had no idea what would happen next.

When she admitted that the IRS had targeted conservative groups, simply because of their political beliefs, she touched off a national firestorm. Her inept attempt to apologize for the Agency’s blunder, and put it to rest, backfired.

In the past three months, we have learned that the Obama administration repeatedly tried to downplay this unlawful targeting scheme which is an unprecedented breach of the public’s trust by the IRS.

President Obama has moved on, calling the IRS targeting scheme a “phony” scandal and acting as if corrective action has been taken and problem solved.

We also know that the scandal continues to expand. And we know that the Obama administration is doing very little to get to the bottom of what happened, despite the president's promise to the American people that the administration would “hold the responsible parties accountable.”

Today, after all this time, it’s clear that the Obama administration isn't really interested in the facts about how this could happen at the IRS or about holding anyone accountable.

In fact, President Obama has moved on, calling the IRS targeting scheme a “phony” scandal and acting as if corrective action has been taken and problem solved.

Not so fast.

From the beginning, the facts did not square with the excuses offered up to the American public by the Obama administration.

It did not take long to punch holes in the IRS’ story that the scheme to target conservatives began in a small office run by just a couple of rogue agents.

In our lawsuit against the IRS, on behalf of 41 conservative organizations in 22 states, the evidence is very clear: documents have revealed that IRS offices coast-to-coast were involved in the scheme, including Lois Lerner herself! In fact, she sent more than a dozen letters to conservative organizations asking them intrusive and inappropriate questions.

The White House has also claimed that the unconstitutional targeting of conservative organizations ended in May 2012. Again, our documents clearly show that the IRS abuse continued through May of 2013 with the most recent letter dated May 6, 2013 – just four days before Lerner's admission.

And we now know, thanks to the testimony of former IRS attorneys, that the office of the IRS Chief Counsel (a political presidential appointee) was involved in the scheme, too. This testimony raises important questions about President Obama’s knowledge or involvement in the scheme.

Now, there’s new information to suggest that the IRS may have been providing taxpayer information to the Federal Election Commission, something that violates federal law and the IRS's own regulations.

An FEC commissioner says he has seen previously undisclosed emails between the IRS and FEC about the targeting scheme. And lawmakers are now demanding the FEC turn over records of more than five years of communications with the IRS.

All of this information comes as the Obama administration continues to stonewall Congress about the scandal -- providing just a fraction of the information requested.

Noting the three month mark since the scandal began, Reps. Darrell Issa (Calif.) and Dave Camp (Mich.), chairmen of the House committees on Oversight and Ways and Means have voiced their concern, saying in a statement, “The American people demand and deserve accountability from their government, not to live in fear of being subject to an audit or other extra scrutiny for reasons unrelated to the content of their filing. So far, the IRS and this administration have provided no assurances that oversight and accountability is in place to prevent such abuses from happening again.”

The president did order the new Acting IRS Commissioner Daniel Werfel to conduct a 30-day review of the IRS scandal. Yes, you read that right, just a 30-day review to investigate a scheme that had been underway for years. It’s no surprise that Werfel claims the 30-day review turned up no “evidence of intentional wrongdoing by anyone in the IRS.”

It’s been 3 months since the American public learned about this outrageous behavior by the IRS. No one has been fired. Lerner and a handful of others are on leave and still being paid.

And what has happened to the investigations underway by the FBI and Department of Justice? Three months later, not one of our clients has been contacted by investigators at the FBI or Justice Department.

It’s difficult to imagine how anyone could claim that a thorough investigation -- or any investigation for that matter – has been conducted without even bothering to interview the taxpayers who were targeted.

So, the IRS scandal continues. It’s been three months and counting. The last three months have produced many more questions and very few answers.

Where’s the accountability, Mr. President?





headline: My surprising, startling experience in Somalia this August
byline: By Michael Shank


When Americans think of Somalia, famine or violence comes to mind -- a fair perception because the country has suffered both -- or they think of the movie "Black Hawk Down" about U.S. attacks in Mogadishu.

The reality in Mogadishu, however, and throughout Somalia, is much different.

America’s response to, and treatment of, this country, therefore, must also be different.

The status quo, tried for decades, will not work any longer.

Whether it was the thousands flocking to Mogadishu’s beautiful beaches last week, celebrating Eid al-Fitr after Ramadan, or the busy, bustling streets of Mogadishu filled with new business, optimism and opportunity, from what I witnessed, a new dawn is rising.

This is a country trying to liberate itself from the oppression of foreign intervention by next-door neighbors, Arab League states, and Western nations.

This was unexpected.

When I departed Washington, D.C. in early August, there were reports of new violence coming on the heels of summer bombings at the UN mission and the Turkish embassy. But to walk the streets of Mogadishu’s old city, in Shangani and Hamar Weyne, with friends who grew up here, who witnessed decades’ worth of destruction, and who still hold out hope for a foreseeable turning point, is inspiring.

A positive future is palpable. You can taste it.

This a country trying to free itself from a painful past – not merely from mass atrocities that came with warlordism (which America supported), weapons trafficking, extreme poverty, and the anarchy of non-state actor violence.

This is a country trying to liberate itself from the oppression of foreign intervention by next-door neighbors, Arab League states, and Western nations.

Everyone wants a piece of Somalia. And no wonder, it is a country rich with resources.

Agriculture, if sustainably developed, could feed an estimated 100 million people.

Oil resources are estimated at 100 billion barrels, which is why BP, Chevron, Conoco, Eni and Shell bought oil blocks in Somalia decades ago.

Fish stocks rival the world’s best and, when threatened by overfishing or toxic dumping by Arab and Asian countries, became the genesis of Somali piracy (for income generation and protection of coastal waters).

Last week, after meeting with the Prime Minister, the Ministers of Defense, Foreign Affairs, Interior and National Security , and Natural Resources, Members of Parliament, the Speaker of the Parliament, and civil society leaders, the path toward rebuilding Somalia became clear.

It must be Somali-led. That means the African Union Mission in Somalia, the security force the West has invested in, must exit and Somali security must be trained and equipped to protect its people.

That means that the Monitoring Group, run by the Western “advisers” who have undermined Somali leaders and institutions, must be dismantled and decommissioned.

That means that the U.S. defense, state and intelligence must stop funding illegal private security firms and stop seeing the military option as the way to create stability in Somalia.

That means that Western banks, like Barclays, must reverse their bans on financial remittances from the Somali diaspora, so that Somalia’s poor can receive subsistence funding.

That’s what the West must stop doing.

Here’s what the West should start doing.

Help the new government feed and employ its people, as there are too many unemployed youth.

Help rebuild the city and country infrastructure.

Help with a renewable energy-reliant power grid. Help with sustainable development, not exploitative extraction and deforestation.

Help the government become a sovereign state, rather than supportive fractious elements.

Help the executive branch (since the Parliament is more representative) be inclusive of all clans since the marginalization of some has led to new recruits for the rebel group al-Shabaab.

This is how Americans can help Somalia.

There are clear opportunities for partnership and engagement and we should pursue them, but Somali people must lead them.

Peace is possible, now let’s help them pursue it.





headline: Morsi detained, bloodbath in Egypt -- whatever happened to the Arab Spring?
byline: By Raymond Stock


As Egypt explodes in what could be civil war, with a reported death toll of at least 628 dead and rising in clashes between security forces and Islamists that began August 14, many are wondering, whatever happened to the Arab Spring? That is, to the wave of popular uprisings against the long-lasting dictatorships of the Middle East and North Africa that began nearly three years ago in Tunisia, and brought the promise of democracy to the region at last?

And what should the U.S. do now that the Muslim Brotherhood--President Obama’s chosen horse in the race for control of the largest Arab state and our most important Arab ally—has apparently lost?

To answer the first question, the Arab Spring never happened as advertised.Rather than a series of straightforward, largely peaceful popular risings led by social-media savvy youth that swept decades-old repressive regimes into the dustbin of history, as first portrayed by the media, something else occurred.

In their place were a couple of military coups in Tunisia and Egypt, prompted by—or under the cover of—of the largest demonstrations yet seen in those countries; armed uprisings in Libya and Syria (the former successful with help from the U.S. and NATO, the latter locked in a stalemate that has claimed a 100,000 lives), and scattered demonstrations that have led nowhere--or next to it--in Bahrain, Iraq, Jordan, Palestine, Sudan and beyond.

Western governments and the global media hailed both these coups as popular revolutions. True, they did follow massive protests in each country, but they only succeeded in changing the regime so quickly and without large-scale fighting because the army had agreed with them.

Though few would admit it, Bush’s drive for democracy in the Arab world had brought the call for serious political change back into public discourse for the first time in decades. 

In both Egypt and Tunisia, the only groups large enough--or at least sufficiently funded and organized to form a viable opposition--were the Islamists.

The secular, Arab nationalist regimes that took control of most of the region beginning with independence from the West in the 1950s tried suppress these extremist interpreters of mainstream Islam—itself a system that distinguishes legally between believers and non-believers, viewing the latter as second or third-degree citizens at best—with only limited success.

Using charities, an appeal to traditional values and even coercion when necessary to gain both members and influence, they were divided between the often subtle and highly-politicized Muslim Brotherhood and the more carelessly outspoken Salafis, “those who follow the ancestors”—who both did shockingly well in Egypt’s nation’s elections.

In Tunisia, secular groups got the majority of votes, but only the Muslim Brotherhood affiliate, al-Nahda, received enough to form the government.

The Salafis, meanwhile, set about attacking the symbols of what had been the most socially liberal of all the Arab states, starting with bars and prostitutes, but also including synagogues and secular universities.

In most of the Arab Spring countries, decades of autocratic rule atop crushing pyramids of social and political injustice seemed the perfect recipe for massive unrest, which finally rose in a tsunami of public anger after a frustrated Tunisian fruit-and-vegetable vendor, Mohammed Bouazizi, set himself afire on December 17, 2010, dying in a coma on January 4, 2011.

Ten days later, on January 14, the 23-year dictatorship of Zine El-Abidine Ben Ali was over, stunning the world—and inspiring the neighbors.

But what had inspired the Tunisians, and soon others, to risk all in revolution?

Though few would admit it, President George W. Bush’s drive for democracy in the Arab world, despite the traumas in and over the war in Iraq, had brought the call for serious political change back into public discourse for the first time in decades.

The bloodily-repressed demonstrations against the disputed re-election of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in Iran in 2009, which President Obama refused to criticize, also played a role. 

Two other factors common to most of these movements, as important as the others, were also at play.

First was the largely underground presence of Islamist revolutionaries in all of these countries. They had been working to overthrow the established, insufficiently religious social order since Hassan al-Banna had founded the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) in the Salafi library in Ismailia, Egypt in 1928.

Their goal was and remains the gradual takeover of society through al-Da`wa, (The Call), a subversive strategy for the incremental takeover of society, in which a pretense of moderation masks the ultimate aim of reestablishing the caliphate, abolished by Ataturk in Turkey in 1924.

They also seek the spread of Sharia—Islamic law—over the whole world, beginning with the Muslim lands, who had strayed from the true path under blasphemous modes of government borrowed from the West.

Second was that, for the first time, the U.S. has a president who apparently believes—though undoubtedly not quite as the Islamists themselves—the MB’s most famous political slogan, “Islam is the solution.”

On June 4, 2009, Obama gave his famous speech to the Islamic world, from Cairo, co-sponsored by al-Azhar, the highest institution in Sunni Islam, and Cairo University. The concept of addressing the world’s 1.6 billion Muslims this way, defining them as members of the Islamic community rather than citizens of their respective countries, is itself a Muslim supremacist idea.

Tellingly, he invited the leaders of the banned Muslim Brotherhood to attend, where they sat in the front row.This effectively excluded his official host and America’s friend, President Hosni Mubarak, who pleaded ill health.

It also seemed to tell the MB, an anti-Western, anti-Christian, anti-Semitic, anti-female and anti-gay group that spawned the ideology that created Al Qaeda, “You are the future.”

Reportedly, in August 2010, Obama commissioned a special intelligence report on the Arab countries, which essentially predicted what became known as the Arab Spring (a term reputedly coined by Mark Lynch in Foreign Policy Magazine on January 6, 2011). 

According to Mark Landler, writing in The New York Times in February 2011, “Mr. Obama’s order, known as a Presidential Study Directive, identified likely flashpoints, most notably Egypt, and solicited proposals for how the administration could push for political change in countries with autocratic rulers who are also valuable allies of the United States.” (The eighteen page paper this order generated is classified, according to Landler.)

When the revolt in Tunisia broke, Ben Ali’s embarrassed French ex-colonial patrons quickly abandoned him—and so did the U.S., which had security cooperation with him.

Then in Egypt, where sporadic self-immolations had begun, copying the human bonfire in Tunisia, a coalition of anti-Mubarak youths called for demonstrations on National Police Day—January 25, 2011--to protest the beating death of an Alexandrian blogger by police in an Internet café in Alexandria the previous year.

A group of young Egyptians using Facebook and Twitter were credited with launching the demonstrations, which drew crowds much larger than normal.Before that day, the Muslim Brotherhood declared its support for the effort, but cautiously sent only its youth wing to take part on the first day of action.

But seeing their success, the group issued an order making it “mandatory” for its members to take part in the next day of protest, on January 28.Their networks in the mosques overcame the government’s shutdown of the Internet and cell phone service to limit the demonstrations, resulting in huge protests that electrified the global audience, a fact the press missed: the myth of the secular revolution was born.That two of the key organizers on Facebook had ties to the Brotherhood was also not widely known until this writer exposed it in July 2012.

As the demonstrations continued to grow all over Egypt and hundreds died on both sides in fights with the police, Mubarak offered a number of compromises, ultimately promising to yield most of his powers to a vice-president, Omar Suleiman, until the next scheduled election that September.

He warned that if he stepped down too quickly, chaos and the Muslim Brotherhood were bound to succeed him.

His critics said that he had created the MB bogeyman to persuade the U.S. to keep him power -- when in fact, it was the only opposition force in Egypt that he could not crush completely. And, after all, the MB was “moderate,” so there was nothing to fear.

On February 10, Obama issued a statement that said,
"too many Egyptians remain unconvinced that the government is serious about a genuine transition to democracy." The next day, Mubarak--who had angered the army by acceding to his wife Susanne’s demand that their non-military son Gamal succeed him as president--was gone.

The armed forces would now run the country.They would organize elections, for which they worked hand in hand with the MB. After all, the MB and the more openly-hardline Salafis were the most capable of filling the vacuum of civilian authority, and the army itself was riddled with Islamists, even at the top.Only worries about being prosecuted for business dealings with Mubarak and his cronies, and the desire to keep the military budget under wraps from parliament, really divided them.

Through the next eighteen months of unstable transition, as skyrocketing crime, incessant strikes and sporadic waves of increasingly violent demonstrations, plus escalating attacks on Christians, dried up foreign investment, drained hard currency reserves and drove tourists away, the young secularists kept calling for the immediate return to civilian rule. That, of course, meant the MB and the Salafis, but—having not yet lived under them—their greatest fear was the perpetuation of army rule, which is all Egypt had known since 1952.

Finally, the MB and the Salafis together won 75% of seats in the first parliamentary elections in the late 2011 and early 2012.But the Islamists behaved so outrageously in office that their share of the vote dropped by half in the presidential balloting of April and May, 2012—when Mohamed Morsi, the hardline ideological enforcer of the MB—barely beat an albeit respectable holdover from the ancien regime.

But this seemed to cause no worry in Washington. In February 2011, National Intelligence Director James Clapper assured a Congressional panel that the Brotherhood is a “largely secular” organization: few seemed to believe his hurried correction.

Despite escalating complaints of the MB’s tyrannical behavior, Morsi’s apparent complicity with an assault by a mob on our Cairo embassy on September 11, 2012, his call for the release of the “Blind Sheikh,” Omar Abdel-Rahman from a North Carolina Prison for the first World Trade Center Bombing (in 1993), and his actual freeing of scores of convicted, often Al Qaeda-connected terrorists from Egyptian prisons, along with the ever-worsening attacks on Christians and the addition of Shiite Muslims to the list of victims, the Obama administration uttered nary a word in complaint.

Instead, Obama sent Security of State John Kerry to Cairo in March 2013to announce that he would increase our aid by $250 million dollars this year.

U.S. and world leaders praised Morsi for brokering a truce between the MB’s Palestinian branch and Israel in a military crisis last November.

Morsi responded with an unprecedented decree that put him above all judicial review while he rammed through a new Islamic constitution that a majority of a tiny minority of voters approved.And still, the White House said nothing.

And it continued to say nothing until the largest demonstrations in human history—up to perhaps 30 million souls, dwarfing those against Mubarak—demanded that the army remove Mohamed Morsi.

It then fell to Morsi’s own appointee as secretary of defense and head of the military, General Abdel Fattah al-Sisi—himself an Islamist, but also a nationalist appalled the chaos that the MB had caused, as well as Morsi’s covert dealings with terrorists who had killed and kidnapped Egyptian soldiers in Sinai—felt that he had to do something.

On July 3, al-Sisi removed Morsi, leading to the confrontation still unfolding Obama and some members of Congress, including prominent Republicans, have threatened to cut off our annual assistance in response—which has left the vast majority of Egyptians furious, and many hoping that he does it.

But to answer our second question, what should our president do? In light of all the above, he should cancel the president’s pointless cancellation today of Bright Star—the bi-annual joint training exercise between our military and theirs. 

And then he should finally speak out against the Islamists' mayhem--the killing and torture of opponents, policemen, Christians and suspected informants; the torching of between seventeen and twenty-one churches yesterday alone, not to mention four Shiites slaughtered in June, and the attempt to create a state within a state by propaganda and violence. Other than that, since threats don't work, he should do nothing. 

He has done enough already.





headline: Why we can kiss the US economy goodbye
byline: By Wayne Allyn Root


I don’t mean to say, “I told you so.” But I told you so.

In my latest book, “The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide: How to Survive, Thrive, and Prosper During Obamageddon” I listed hundreds of statistics proving that the U.S. economy was headed for total collapse. But that was all written months ago. Unfortunately, the worst was yet to come.

The results are in. The picture is grim. Here are some frightening economic numbers to think about the next time the lying, manipulating, mainstream media tells you that we are in “recovery.”

First, almost 50% of Americans have less than $500 in savings. Not surprisingly 1 out of 3 residents of Obama’s home state of Illinois live in poverty. A mind numbing 4 of 5 Americans are either experiencing poverty, foreclosure or welfare, or will in their lifetime. Four out of five.Say goodbye to the myth of the American Dream. It’s only a nightmare now.

Ditto for the American middle class. Obama has massacred them. Our middle class now ranks 27thin the world.

I’ve argued from day one that Obama’s goal was to create a two class society. The two classes are the super-rich (who are beholden to Obama for corporate welfare, bailouts, and government contracts), and the poor (who are beholden to Obama for checks to survive). Look no further than the new immigration bill to see the final destruction of middle class wages.

More grim news just in: Auto sales are collapsing. Construction jobs are falling off a cliff. And U.S. factory orders just suffered the biggest drop in a year.

Almost 80% of the jobs created in Obama's America are part-time jobs that won’t pay the bills of an average middle class lifestyle.

What about jobs? Isn’t that picture getting rosier by the minute?

Well actually, no. Let’s analyze the REAL numbers: Since the start of 2013 we’ve gained 953,000 jobs, but amazingly 731,000 of them are crummy low-wage part time jobs. That means almost 80% of the jobs created in Obama's America are part-time jobs that won’t pay the bills of an average middle class lifestyle.

High quality jobs under Obama they are losing out by 10 to 1 versus crummy low-paying jobs. Facts don’t lie: So far this year over 246,000 low-paying waiter or bartender jobs have been added to the U.S. economy, versus only 24,000 high-paying manufacturing jobs.

How bad is it? Well here’s a Hall of Fame Triple Play:

The Obama administration just hired a company to promote ObamaCare over the phone to Americans -- guess what? Even those jobs are part-time, with no health insurance!

The head of the IRS just testified in front of Congress that he’d rather keep his own health insurance, rather than switch to ObamaCare. The IRS is in charge of ObamaCare, and even they don’t want any part of it.

And, the second biggest employer in America is now a temp agency!

Good luck looking for a quality job in this Obama economy.

Still not convinced?

Food stamp rolls are growing seventy-five times as fast as employment. The national debt has increased by 50% under Barack Obama. Obama promised to reduce health insurance bills for an average American family by $2,500 per year, instead your health bills went up by $3,000 per year.

Meanwhile, labor participation by men is at the lowest rate ever measured – since they started tracking it in 1948. And here’s the clincher: 90 million able-bodied, working-age Americans are not working.

And if you think help is on the way, I've got a bridge to sell you ... in Detroit. The biggest American city to ever go bankrupt, Detroit, has been run by Democrats since 1962. That's over half a century of 100% Democrat rule, using the exact same policies as Obama.

The city is now in ruins. Detroit leads the nation in illiteracy, welfare, food stamps, violent crime, murder, abandoned properties, and broken street lights.

The city of Detroit’s downfall is built around four core ideas: never-ending entitlement spending, the most government employees per capita of any city in America, monstrous debt, and the highest property taxes in America.

But wait, isn’t that Obama’s exact prescription for the nation? High taxes, more spending, more debt, and more government employees. Bingo. Help isn’t coming folks. The cavalry isn’t riding in to save us. They are coming to destroy us.

Detroit is certainly the future of America under Obama. It’s the exact same policies. We are experiencing Groundhog Day -- doing the same stupid things, and expecting a different result.

One last morsel of food for thought: The EU is in the middle of a Great Depression. Countries like Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, Greece and Cyprus face total disaster. Their economies are ruined for generations to come.

Yet America under Obama now has more debt than every country in the European Union-combined. Our country has more government debt than any country in the history of the world.

Say goodbye to the U.S. economy. It’s been nice while it lasted.



Wayne Allyn Root is capitalist evangelist, entrepreneur, and Libertarian-conservative Republican. He is a former Libertarian vice presidential nominee. Wayne's latest book is "The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide: Secrets to Protecting Your Family, Your Finances, and Your Freedom." For more, visit his website: www.ROOTforAmerica.com. Follow him on Twitter@WayneRoot.



headline: Our odd addiction to outlaws
byline: By Mark Lee Gardner


“It is one of the characteristics of human nature to worship at the shrine of anyone who excels in any line, let it be for good or for evil.” -- Wayman Hogue, Back Yonder, 1932

On April 19, 1882, the Irish writer Oscar Wilde looked out of his hotel room window in St. Joseph, Missouri, at a large crowd of people gathered around a small house on a distant hilltop. “It is the house of the great train-robber and murderer, Jesse James, who was killed by his pal last week,” Wilde wrote to a friend, “and the people are relic hunters.”

Wilde marveled at the prices Jesse’s possessions brought at public auction. A chromolithographic print “of the most dreadful kind” that had hung in the outlaw’s home sold for a price that “in Europe only an authentic Titian can command, or an undoubted Mantegna.”

Jesse’s celebrity status, which far outshined Wilde’s, baffled the Irishman. “The Americans are certainly great hero-worshippers,” he observed, “and always take their heroes from the criminal classes.”

The hero-worshipping Wilde encountered in St. Joseph was just the beginning. In the years to come, dozens and dozens of books, dime novels, and eventually movies, about Jesse and Frank James were produced to meet the American public’s ravenous appetite for such fare.

It was the mythic Jesse that I admired, the audacious gunslinger who was more Robin Hood than ruthless killer, more Tyrone Power or Robert Wagner than Brad Pitt.

“[T]he men and kids never tire of reading about this king of outlaws,” said one newsstand proprietor in 1891, who claimed to sell three times as many Jesse James books as anything else he stocked.

Nearly seventy years later, as a child during the 1960s and early 70s, I counted Jesse James as one of my heroes, too. Of course, I grew up in northwest Missouri in the heart of Jesse James country. And it was the mythic Jesse that I admired, the audacious gunslinger who was more Robin Hood than ruthless killer, more Tyrone Power or Robert Wagner than Brad Pitt (all of whom have portrayed Jesse in film). And I admit that I still despise Jesse’s assassin, Bob Ford, even though Ford’s bullet likely prevented more deaths of innocent people at Jesse’s hands.

But while Jesse may have been the king of outlaws at one time, it did not take long for claimants to the throne to rise up in the American imagination – notorious criminals who also were rehabilitated, romanticized, and worshipped.

Born in 1859, "Billy the Kid" (real name Henry McCarty) was a personable New Mexico gunman and smalltime cattle thief who achieved national attention in April 1881 when he pulled off a remarkable daylight escape from the Lincoln County courthouse jail by single-handedly killing his two guards with their own guns.

There were more headlines nearly three months later when Sheriff Pat Garrett hunted Billy down and shot him dead in a darkened room at Fort Sumner, New Mexico. But it took a bestselling book published forty-five years later to send Billy into the pop culture stratosphere.

Readers of Walter Noble Burns’ "The Saga of Billy the Kid" discovered a “Robin Hood of the Mesas” who “went his way through life without remorse, unracked by nerves or memories, gay, light-hearted, fearless, always smiling.”

In late 2010, New Mexico’s governor Bill Richardson considered granting a posthumous pardon to the Kid, claiming he wanted to fulfill a promise made by his predecessor, Lew Wallace, back in 1879.

Richardson announced his decision – not to issue the pardon – live on "Good Morning America" (I was actually rooting for the Kid on this one).

The following year, an authentic tintype image of the outlaw sold for $2.3 million dollars. To date, more than sixty films have featured Billy the Kid as a character, with a miniseries about Billy currently in the works at Fox.

Movies, in fact, have done much to rehabilitate the criminals of our past – or maybe Hollywood has simply given us what we wanted.

Who doesn’t immediately picture handsome, devil-may-care Paul Newman and Robert Redford in their mind when western outlaws Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid are mentioned, or Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway when the particularly nasty public enemies Bonnie and Clyde come up?

Indeed, the cult of outlaw celebrity Oscar Wilde witnessed in St. Joseph shows no signs of letting up, and that worries me. There’s nothing wrong with the fascination we have for these social outcasts, but when it turns to infatuation, we risk losing sight of their true – and usually awful – crimes.

What future, brooding hunks, I wonder, might eventually portray accused Boston Marathon bombers Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev in a TV movie?

Will some governor, a hundred years from now, consider a posthumous pardon for Lee Harvey Oswald or Charles Manson?

What we need are more efforts to remember the other sides of the stories – like they do in Northfield, Minnesota.

Every September, the people of Northfield hold a graveside ceremony for the cashier who thwarted the James-Younger gangs’ attempt to rob the First National Bank back in 1876. The cashier’s name was Joseph Lee Heywood, and for his bravery, he was murdered by Frank James with a bullet to the head.

Frank James rode off into history with his brother Jesse and was never punished for his crimes. Heywood left behind a wife and two-year-old daughter. But 137 years later, the people of Northfield have not forgotten the real hero of this outlaw tale. We shouldn’t forget who the real heroes are, either.





headline: SOUL FOOD: Jim “The Shark” Dreyer’s powerful message of faith and hope
byline: By Kelly Wright


“The human body is an amazing machine but it has its limitations. The human spirit knows no limitations when driven by something larger than you.” –Jim Dreyer aka "The Shark"

A week ago while co-hosting “Happening Now” on Fox News with my colleague Jenna Lee, we had the pleasure of interviewing Jim Dreyer. The native of Michigan is the only man to have set records for swimming across all five Great Lakes. It has earned him the reputation of being known as “The Shark.”

Later, Dreyer told me that he is a man who believes in walking by faith, not by sight. Of course that is easier said than done, particularly when you’re facing what appears to be insurmountable problems.

Dreyer acknowledges that Detroit is facing such problems. Hard times have fallen on his home state, especially for the people of Detroit, a city that he loves. The decline of this once great and prosperous city is of particular concern to Dreyer.

After Detroit announced it was filing for bankruptcy because it could no longer meet its financial obligations, Dreyer saw the once thriving city become a dwelling place of hopelessness. So he sought to do something that he hoped would lift the spirits of people living in the beleaguered city. He wants them to know they can rise again. It will be difficult, he adds, but Detroit can rise again.

He described how he began to hallucinate. He saw a vision of a man dressed in a white robe standing on the water. 

Dreyer says; “We don’t have to sink with the weight of our burdens. We can pull together and we can pull ourselves up.”

So "The Shark" dove into the waters of Lake St. Clair and began a personal quest of swimming 22 miles (farther than the English Channel) from Algonac to Belle Isle near Detroit. 

The journey was already difficult but Dreyer added the task of hauling two zodiacs filled with a ton of bricks to call attention to Habitat for Humanity’s campaign to Rebuild Michigan.

During his interview on "Happening Now," he told us: “Bricks are obviously very symbolic of building," he added. "There's a message of hope that we wanted to deliver, that we don't have to sink with the weight of our burdens."

The oddity of Dreyer’s extreme swimming is that he is a man who does it afraid. As a child he survived a near drowning. He learned how to swim at age thirty two. He still has a fear of deep water. It’s a fear that he faces each time he enters the water.

He set a goal of completing the difficult swim in 30 hours but complications quickly arose when he found himself swimming against the tide with four foot waves crashing against him.

The weight of the bricks, the waves pounding him, and struggling against the water all began taking its toll on Dreyer’s body and mind.

Fear began to taunt him. He began to doubt himself; “What am I doing? I can’t finish this swim. Besides, I’m afraid of the water, I’m afraid of drowning.”

Yes, in the middle of this self-inflicted challenge, Jim began to wrestle with the demons of fear, doubt and uncertainty.

It has an uncanny irony to what some citizens of Detroit are feeling. Can their city make a comeback?

How will they make it when a tidal wave of debt, unemployment, crime and mismanagement is crashing against them, how will they save themselves from drowning in a sea of despair?

Dreyer told me; “I was in 3 to 4 foot waves pulling a ton of bricks. It’s like pushing an automobile over speed bumps.”

The grueling trek made Dreyer struggle with his faith. He yelled out to God; “Why won’t you help me?” 

Dreyer says there are times when your physical strength is depleted and you feel like your body can’t go any further.

Your mental abilities are fatigued and you’re no longer thinking straight.

“That’s when you really do need a higher power because at that point you don’t have a lot of faculties left anymore.”

As Dreyer continued to battle against the waters of Lake St. Clair, he described how he began to hallucinate. He saw a vision of a man dressed in a white robe standing on the water.

Dreyer said he continued to swim towards the man, forgetting the weariness and pain coursing through his body. When he got to the man in white, the image disappeared.

But Dreyer says the experience renewed his vision of hope. Instead of feeling insane or afraid, he felt a surge of inspiration from that moment on.

He told me he began to recall and recite words of scripture out loud as he swam; “I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me.”

Dreyer recalls that during the last night of his swim, the waves subsided and off in the distance he could see a rainbow against a grey sky, which gave him more determination to make it to Belle Isle. Exhausted yet elated, Dreyer kissed the shore then triumphantly raised his hands to thank God for completing his mission.

Then, as he prepared to speak to reporters, a woman from Detroit with tears streaming down her face approached him. She hurriedly but gently pulled him aside to tearfully exclaim; “A lot of people think Detroit’s problem is apathy. It’s not apathy! It’s that people have given up hope. When you lose hope, you die inside.”

The woman continued, “I thought I would never lose hope. I heard about your swim and I just had to be here to see it. I want to thank you because you’ve given me back my life. You’ve restored my hope.”

Dreyer, now moved to tears, thanked the woman. He says her encouraging words will remain a source of inspiration for his entire life. Because of her, he says, the swim with all of its pain and agony was worth it.

Dreyer wanted me to tell you that God is the source of his strength. He has a message for people dealing with hard times: “Please don’t give up hope. It’s amazing what we can accomplish if we don’t lose sight of where our strength comes from.”

He adds, “Jesus Christ is the cornerstone of our foundation. Brick by brick, stone by stone we can rebuild our broken cities and lives.”





headline: Alex Rodriguez is just like America
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


The question many people seem to have for Alex Rodriguez, now banned from baseball for 211 games for using performance-enhancing drugs, is this: You’re obviously a great baseball player. Why risk your multimillion-dollar annual contract and your legacy in sports in order to perform even better?

There is a likely psychological answer to that question that pertains to Rodriguez, and there is a definite psychological answer to that question that pertains to our culture -- and not just sports.

As for Rodriguez, the answer probably resides in deep feelings of unworthiness. In psychiatry, many behavioral manifestations are fueled by their opposites. People who feel spiritually impoverished risk their great fortunes to build bigger ones, as though their bank accounts can erase unloving parents. People who were confined to unloving households move again and again, as though every place they linger represents the same peril as their homes of origin (which it need not).

You don’t end up carrying a big stick, injecting yourself with long needles, trying to make your muscles big so you can smack things around, if you don’t feel weak. 

Alex Rodriguez would not pump his muscles up and pump up his public persona were he not, deep down, deflated emotionally. He uses performance-enhancing drugs because he is running from truths that require more and more fame and adoration to avoid. He doesn’t just want to be No. 1; he unconsciously thinks he needs to be No. 1 to avoid coming face-to-face with his greatest fear: that he is a zero.

Freud must be grinning that we even wonder why Rodriguez is Rodriguez. You don’t end up carrying a big stick, injecting yourself with long needles, trying to make your muscles big so you can smack things around, if you don’t feel weak.

Now, on to our sick, sorry excuse for culture in America: Millions upon millions are addicted to entertainment and lying and any manner of thing that distracts us from the obligation to act with autonomy and in accord with our principles.

The majority of Americans watch reality TV that has no connection to reality. We Tweet as though we have followers when we do not. We have hundreds or thousands of false friends on Facebook. We are legalizing marijuana to get as many people high as possible. We take guns away from law-abiding citizens because the idea of having to arm oneself, instead of looking to the mother state to defend us, is abhorrent to the majority of the voting public, which long ago became addicted to fakery and foolishness. We keep adults at home on mommy and daddy’s insurance until they are 25-year-old infants. We hand out food stamps like mother’s milk to anyone willing to suckle.

And we don’t love sports, anymore, because it showcases extremes of human talent and grit. We love sports now because they are hyperbolic, blow-up circuses that showcase what people can do when they shed reality and cede their physiologies to human growth hormone, blood doping and all the rest. And when we tune in, we are just watching a metaphor for ourselves.

Asking what is wrong with Alex Rodriguez is largely beside the point. Who cares about him? The game is being played from the stands now, where few of us really care to stand for the truth any more than he does, and most folks are busy texting, anyhow, while Tweeting that they are attending a real game, which they are not.

In YOUR America, but for a 9th-inning surge of reality, the game has been played, and Alex Rodriguez is its hero.







headline: Three cheers for Reince Priebus -- good riddance to rubbish moderators
byline: By Tim Graham


Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus kicked off a firestorm this summer when he announced that GOP debates in the 2016 presidential year would not happen on CNN and NBC if the networks aired programs focusing on the life and times of presumed Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.

Not surprisingly, his declaration immediately offended our nation’s “objective” media elite. Now they are complaining that Priebus is “threatening” to withhold debates from CNN and NBC if they air their planned Hillary Clinton films, whether they’re creating nonfiction or Hollywood half-fiction.

Heck, MSNBC’s Chris Matthews even accused Priebus of plotting to “suppress a free media.”
But here’s how I see it. That “threat” is a wonderful way to start taking on the media’s blatant bias and Democratic electioneering.

There’s nothing undemocratic in asserting that Republican primary elections are for Republican voters, and should stop being a playground for liberal media mischief.  

There’s nothing undemocratic in asserting that Republican primary elections are for Republican voters, and should stop being a playground for liberal media mischief. 

The Grand Old Party doesn’t need any more debates where George Stephanopoulos asks six insincere questions about banning contraceptives, or Brian Williams suggests GOP governors shouldn’t be able to go to sleep at night after executing murderers.

They don’t need “town meetings” where badly disguised liberal activists stand up posing as “the people” and make leftist speeches designed to embarrass conservatives.
If liberal media outlets don’t want to air Republican debates without liberal moderators, then so be it. Republican voters don’t need to watch MSNBC or CNN to be able to find these debates and make up their minds.
No one inside the liberal media can plausibly argue that Mitt Romney doing all those primary debates on liberal networks helped him in November.
Why shouldn’t Republican debates build an audience for upstart conservative TV programs and video websites?
Republican politicians should grant access to conservative media and help develop their public image as authoritative sources of news and information.
It’s one thing for a Republican to shun liberal outlets that could impair a campaign. It’s another thing to be so intimidated by the negativity of the liberal media that you avoid the conservative media.
Liberal reporters should be forced to get acquainted with conservative news sites and radio shows to find the latest in what Republicans are saying. Liberal journalists need to have their comfortably arrogant bubble broken.
In the general election, the debates are for all voters, so there’s no avoiding the “mainstream” press. But Republicans should demand that the days of a quadruple-thumping by four liberal moderators become a thing of the past.
At least two of the GOP debates should be moderated by journalists that the Democrats will protest and get nervous headaches from during their preparations.
Fox News moderators didn’t lay down for the Republicans in the last set of primaries.
The incredibly biased and phony “town hall” debate must go, unless each party is allowed to select its own “regular people” to ask questions.
The days of these fraudulent “undecided voters” whipping Republicans with left-wing questions must end.
In 2012, it was obvious, on television and in real time, that several of the questioners were die-hard Bush-haters and Obama backers.
On the ground level, Republicans need to convince their friends, relatives, co-workers, and others that liberal media bias is not just an excuse when conservatives lose elections. It’s a serious national problem when people who pretend to be the government-watchers in our democracy act like a state-owned press that ignores “phony scandals.”
Media bias doesn’t always win elections for the home team of Democrats, as Ronald Reagan brilliantly proved.
The Tea Party proved that again in 2010, despite a virtual avalanche of liberal-media invective.
Winning elections is more complicated than just winning in TV studios, and the kinds of media that political pros have to master in communicating with voters are now incredibly diverse. But the “weather forecast” of our politics – when it is forever sunlight for Obama and severe thunderstorms for conservatives – routinely impacts conservatives’ image and conservative morale. 
No one should expect that the power of our ideas is so strong that they will bowl over the media, and we can put a “Mission Accomplished” Banner on the set of MSNBC and be cheered like Tom Cruise at the end of “Top Gun.”
When Reagan wrapped up his presidency with a televised farewell speech in 1989, he knew Sam Donaldson would come on ABC at the end and insist that it was all too positive and didn’t stress his blunders enough. He pressed on with confidence.

Conservatives can take the heat. But it’s time to protest a media that all but throws us in the oven with an apple in our mouths.



Tim Graham is director of media analysis at the Media Research Center and co-author (with Brent Bozell) of "Collusion: How the Media Stole the 2012 Election and How to Stop Them From Doing It In 2016."



headline: Mr. Obama, you should have met with Putin
byline: By Matthew Dunn


As an impartial outsider, I’ve always believed that President Obama’s administration has struggled to reconcile its political beliefs with the actions required to deal with the global challenges America currently faces.

That’s not to say that I’ve felt the president himself couldn’t have been an excellent leader at other key points in U.S. history.

Specifically, I’ve believed that he would have made an excellent Cold War president during moments when that war was in danger of becoming explosive.

My take on the man is that he is a measured, calm, cerebral, individual who – despite recent evidence to the contrary – doesn’t like a fight. I could imagine him picking up the phone to Khrushchev, speaking privately to him without the pressure of media scrutiny, and averting a crisis.

Obama's decision to cancel the summit with Putin is a snub, plain and simple.  It is also petulant, and potentially dangerous.

This year, tensions between Russia and the United States have been steadily increasing.

We’ve had spies being caught and expelled, disagreements on major issues such as the Syrian disaster, open U.S. hostility toward Russia’s human rights violations, a Russian president who’s described America’s foreign policy as imperialistic, and most recently a 1-year Russian visa being issued to NSA leaker and American fugitive Edward Snowden.

Alright, despite these antagonisms and the fact that Russian and American missiles have always remained pointing at each other after the collapse of communism, that doesn’t mean that we’re back in the bad old days of a nuclear standoff. But it does mean we are emerging into in a period where Russia is once again in the headlines. If my analysis of the U.S. president was correct, it’s a time when Obama’s strengths should shine.

That hasn’t happened.

Instead, Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes announced Wednesday that Obama’s cancelling plans to have a summit with Putin in Moscow, because the Snowden situation has been the last straw amid increasingly acerbic relations between Russia and America.

It’s a snub, plain and simple. It is also petulant, and potentially dangerous.

Let’s look at the facts amid the areas of conflict between Russia and America.

Earlier this year, a CIA officer was caught in Moscow, publicly humiliated, and expelled. For sure, Russia could have been handled the episode differently, but it’s not something we should get upset about. We spy; they spy. It’s what we’ve always done to each other.

The Syrian disaster’s getting worse – more people have died there than during the entire Bosnian War – and we need Putin fully at the Security Council negotiating table given that his support of President Assad is perpetuating the problem.

We may not like Putin’s stance on Syria, but distancing him from our thus far fruitless attempts to resolve the situation will only produce one outcome: further massacres.

Right now, U.S. attempts to adopt a moral high ground over human rights abuses in Russia is pointless and some might say even hypocritical given allegations of human rights abuse during the American War on Terror and more recently the startling revelations about PRISM and its intrusion in the lives of law abiding U.S. citizens.

Putin’s assertion that America’s foreign policy is imperialistic, together with other anti-U.S. comments, has just been vote-winning rhetoric.

During the last year he’s felt vulnerable and in need of playing the strong man to a vast, disparate, and in large part impoverished populous.

I don’t think Putin’s displaying himself as an international statesman by doing this, but nor do I think it’s something to get worked up about.

And finally, there’s Edward Snowden.

Yes, Putin’s given him a visa to stay in Russia, but it’s only a 1-year visa. If Putin really wanted to antagonize Obama, he’d have given Snowden unconditional asylum.

Instead, he’s stuck a finger up to Obama but at the same time done the bare minimum for Snowden while allowing doors to remain open for future bilateral talks between America and Russia. Obama and his administration should have realized that, and attended the Moscow summit.

Snowden’s future is irrelevant. There’s big boys stuff to discuss, and everyday lives are being lost while that’s not happening.

On Tuesday’s “The Tonight Show,” Obama said that the Snowden development and other issues showed that Russia was “slipping back into Cold War thinking and a Cold War mentality.”

It’s interesting that he references that mentality, because at that time most statesmen and politicians on both sides averted a catastrophe by being able to focus on the bigger picture.

Despite assassinations, scandals, proxy wars, missile crises, frenetic espionage, and the Sword of Damoclese hanging over the world, leaders back then carried on talking to each other.

Talk is anything but cheap. Mr. Obama and his administration would do well to remember that at a time when the world has enough existing problems to deal with, when we need statesmen to be magnificent negotiators and diplomats, and when snubs are antagonistic and destructive.





headline: How Hillary Clinton can win in 2016
byline: By Douglas E. Schoen


2016 is in the air.

Vice President Joe Biden is heading to Iowa next month to be the keynote speaker at Senator Tom Harkin’s steak fry fundraiser, an event that often showcases speakers aspiring to be president.

Things are heating up, too, on the Republican side with the latest war of words between Governor Chris Christie and Senator Rand Paul; discussion of Senator Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio’s chances; questions as to whether Congressman Paul Ryan will be mounting another campaign and whether a centrist like Senator John McCain or Mitt Romney will be the choice once more.

But with all these question marks swirling around the wide field for 2016, there remains one forgone conclusion amongst pundits on both sides. If Hillary Clinton wants the nomination, it’s hers for the taking.

In order to separate herself from Obama’s legacy, Clinton must systematically address the economy and jobs in a way that resonates with a frustrated electorate.

Indeed, she holds a substantial lead in polls against her most likely Democrat opponent, Joe Biden. According to a new Rasmussen poll, 39 percent of those surveyed said that if the 2016 Democratic primary were held today they would want Clinton as compared to 7 percent for Biden. And while there are many who are not interested in having Clinton as the nominee – 27 percent said that she was their least favorite candidate – it is clear that she is the one to beat.

Clinton not only leads the Democratic field in polls, but also leads potential Republican challengers. In fact, a new PPP poll shows that Clinton could make Georgia a swing state. She leads Rand Paul, Paul Ryan, Jeb Bush and Chris Christie in a head-to-head in the Peach State. And she has been collecting praise from Republicans including Newt Gingrich who said that the GOP is “incapable of competing” in 2016 if she is the nominee.

Though it looks as if Clinton should run away with the nomination, she faces a series of challenges that she must address if she is to be the next president of the United States.

First and foremost, Clinton will have to contend with President Obama’s sinking approval ratings. Just last week he suffered his largest dip in the last two years: 7 points in one day.

His press conference on Friday did little to raise confidence in his and his administration's ability to manage the fallout from Edward Snowden’s leaks and an overreaching NSA, the upcoming fiscal battle with House Republicans, foreign policy especially vis-à-vis Russia, not to mention getting the economy back on track.

In order to separate herself from Obama’s legacy – which is increasingly in doubt – Clinton must systematically address the economy and jobs in a way that resonates with a frustrated electorate. As it stands, 52 percent of Americans think the economy is in recession. And unemployment sunk to 7.4 percent in August.

The president has been emphasizing economic policies for the middle class as he tours the U.S., but has given very few details as to how he will promote economic growth and create jobs.

It follows that the central theme of the Clinton reemergence must be revitalizing the economy with a coherent set of pro-growth policies.

We need to see incentives for businesses to invest; tax code reform; a plan to facilitate the continued vitality of Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security. And perhaps most of all we need a plan to balance the federal budget as we face another government shutdown on October 1.

A successful Clinton run for the White House will most certainly have to highlight the unity and singularity of the American experience in promoting a new and attainable American dream.

We have seen far too much division in Washington politics – from both sides of the aisle and the president himself. With strong support in the minority community, amongst young voters and moderates and independents, Clinton has the chance to be the great unifier that we need so badly by promoting policies that benefit everyone.

To be sure, Clinton has everything going for her right now. But she also has her work cut out for her.

She must tread carefully, defining herself as distinct from President Obama while still showing support for an agenda that she will be inexorably linked to from her time as Secretary of State, especially vis-à-vis foreign policy.

2016 is Clinton’s for the taking, but only if she can put forward a set of policies that show she is thinking not like a Democrat or Republican but as an American. 





headline: Republican leaders pushing door open for immigration deal
byline: By Juan Williams


Rep. Paul Ryan, the GOP’s 2012 vice presidential nominee, recently told a Wisconsin town-hall meeting that the House has plans to vote on immigration reform in October.

If Ryan, R-Wis., is willing to publicly talk in such terms, then he is opening the door to Republicans allowing their leadership to pass the bill with votes from Democrats.

Recent remarks by other GOP leadership figures give reason for increased optimism on immigration reform as well.

On “Fox News Sunday,” House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.) promised a vote on separate bills containing components of immigration reform as it passed the Senate.

Cantor committed neither to a vote on a comprehensive package nor a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants already in the United States.

Still, the promises of floor votes from Ryan and Cantor amounts to a breakthrough at a moment when House Republicans fear primary challenges from hardliners who might accuse them of going soft and giving “amnesty” to illegal immigrants.

Most House Republicans are still risk-averse on immigration reform, content to do nothing and let it die without any vote and without any conference with the Senate that could require further compromise.

But the new posture on immigration reform by high profile Republicans could end the paralysis.

The House needs 218 votes to pass any immigration bill. Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-Ill.), a key negotiator on immigration reform, estimates that 195 of 201 Democrats currently support the bill that passed the Senate in June. That means about 23 GOP votes are needed.

Immigration reform groups are targeting about 50 Republicans during the August recess, holding rallies and trying to drive large turnout for town-hall meetings. The idea is to show those House Republicans that there is support within their districts for immigration reform from business groups, farmers, labor unions and evangelical groups.

Cecilia Munoz, director of the White House Domestic Policy Council, has taken a lead role in galvanizing support for immigration reform inside Congressional districts during the recess.

“I am optimistic [there will be a vote on immigration reform in the House],” she told me in a recent interview for Fox News Latino. “None of us ever believed it was going to be easy. This isn’t about it being easy… [but] we now have strong bipartisan support. It is visible all over the country.”

As the third week of recess begins, there is a glimmer of hope as a few more rank-and-file Republicans are voicing support for an immigration deal. And there is pressure building from the outside.

Last week, for example, the Bipartisan Policy Center's immigration task-force, co-chaired by former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, released recommendations closely mirroring the Senate-passed immigration bill. That could give more cover to House Republicans to support comprehensive immigration reform.

Already, GOP Reps. Joe Heck (Nev.), Jeff Denham (Calif.) and Dave Reichert (Wash.) are saying they could support a pathway to citizenship. So, too, are Reps. Peter King (N.Y.), Aaron Shock (Ill.) and Daniel Webster (Fla.).

House GOP Whip Kevin McCarthy (Calif.) has not embraced the path to citizenship yet, but he has moved to the point of allowing illegal immigrants to become eligible for some legal status.

Pro-immigration reform groups, including labor unions, have targeted McCarthy during the August recess in his California district, which is home to a growing Latino population.

Another Republican feeling pressure from pro-immigration groups during the recess, Rep. Mike Coffman (Colo.), appeared at a mostly Hispanic meeting in his district and spoke about the need for immigration reform that is “compassionate in keeping families together.”

Immigration advocates are also highlighting the lack of a Tea Party backlash during the recess against prominent Republican senators who took the risk of supporting immigration reform, such as Sens. Lindsey Graham (S.C.) and Lamar Alexander (Tenn.).

There are several options when it comes to the mechanics of passing immigration reform in the House.

One drastic political move would be for Democrats and a few Republicans to force a vote on a comprehensive immigration bill using a discharge petition. The GOP leadership would have to promise its renegades not to punish them for defying their caucus to support the petition.

That strategy would protect both the leadership and most Republicans — who could continue to oppose legalization or citizenship — from charges of going soft on immigration reform even as it passed into law.

Ryan proposed something similar but far less bold at one town-hall meeting.

He said the Republican leadership might just bring the various parts of the Senate’s immigration bill to the floor and allow votes to see if there is a “majority of the majority” support inside the GOP caucus.

“We don’t know if we have a majority until we vote on it,” Ryan said.

He added: “I’ve spoken to [Speaker] John Boehner…we all agree it is better to legislate in stages…I believe what I’ve just laid out is something that a consensus of Republicans and Democrats can agree to.”

With House Democrats ready to support the components of the Senate bill, the Republican leadership, by lowering the bar to the vote, would be allowing the bill to become law. Yet at the same time, Boehner and his lieutenants would be insulating themselves from some of the danger of a backlash from hard-right opponents of immigration reform.

Ryan later told an interviewer: “A lot of members know we need immigration for our economy, especially the agricultural ones…most Republicans agree that legal immigration, properly structured, is good for the economy and good for the country.”

Finally.





headline: Make no mistake, Mr. Obama, Iran's Rouhani is no 'moderate'
byline: By Rabbi Abraham Cooper, Harold Brackman


Who doesn't want the inauguration Sunday of Iran's new President Hassan Rouhani, to mark a new era of "moderation"? After all, his smiling face alone adorning the front page of The New York Times should come as a welcome change to the snarly, disheveled sneer of his predecessor Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

But does Hassan Rouhani’s “moderation” begin or end with his smile?

Is the charm offensive just a façade or the real thing—that could help improve the lives of the Iranian people and perhaps dial back the Middle East from the abyss of nuclear confrontation?



Dr. Samuel Johnson once described second marriages as “the triumph of hope over experience.” But baseless optimism does not an effective Iranian policy make. Facts do.

Here’s a look at Rouhani’s past.

The 64- year old president’s credentials date back to the Iranian Revolution of 1979. An early supporter of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, he followed Khomeini into in exile in Paris and returned with him to Tehran.

A protégé of Iranian President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani(1989-1997), Rouhani became the Secretary of Iran’s powerful Supreme National Security Council in 1989, continuing in that position under Rafsanjani’s successor President Mohammad Khatami (1997-2005).

He was Iran’s top nuclear negotiator with the EU3—Britain, France, and Germany—from 2003-2005.

These various "postings" if you will, offer important insights into the man and his mission.

First, when faced with 1999 student protests (which prefigured Iran’s 2009 unsuccessful “Green Revolution”), Rouhani warned “yesterday we received a decisive revolutionary order to crush mercilessly and monumentally” and led the resulting crackdown, demanding that those arrested be executed.

Second, he won plaudits at home as “the Diplomat Sheikh” for successfully running the negotiations clock even as Tehran’s nuclear program continued to expand and for successfully dividing the U.S. and the E.U. with a strategy admirers called “widen the transatlantic gap.”

These “accomplishments” along with his close personal relationship with Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei-- the real power in Iran—help account for the May 2013 purge 680 of 688 candidates for president by Iran’s Guardian Council.

Rouhani’s patron, former President Rafsanjani, who is considered a “conservative pragmatist”, and Mohammad Reza Aref, the only real reformer in the race, dropped out under pressure.

This left Rouhani, the eventual winner, as the only remaining “moderate” candidate in a race that U.S. Secretary of State Kerry called “hardly an election by standards which most people in most countries judge free, fair, open, accessible, accountable elections.”

Regarding foreign policy -- and especially Iran’s potential leveraging its nuclear clout, here is what Rouhani’s mentor, “moderate” President Rafsanjani said in 2001:

“If one day ... the Islamic world will be equipped with weapons available to Israel now ... the employment of even one atomic bomb inside Israel will wipe it off the face of the earth but would only do damage to the Islamic world.”

Since he won election, Rouhani continues to support the embattled regime of Bashar al-Assad in Syria, declaring that Assad “has constantly been on the frontline of fighting Zionism and this resistance line must not be weakened.”

So now what?

For starters the Obama administration should signal its support for the millions of Iranians desperate for real change.

Most important, for policymakers to remember, is that politically and legally, Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei remains the ultimate authority in Iran. It is he, not Rouhani who directly controls the country’s nuclear destiny.

It is telling that Khamenei and has already forbidden the future president from making any concessions to the West and who recently rejected a U.S. offer for bilateral talks made by Vice President Joe Biden.

And on the nuclear threat, Israel Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu got it right on a recent edition of "Face the Nation":

“I think we’ve spoken many times, President Obama and I, about the need to prevent Iran from getting nuclear weapons. I know that is the U.S. policy.

"What is important to convey to them [Iran], especially after the elections, that that policy will not change and that it will be backed up by increasingly forceful sanctions and military action.

In my view, there is a new president in Iran. He believes—he’s criticizing his predecessor for being a wolf in wolf’s clothing. His strategy is -- be a wolf in sheep’s clothing. Smile and build a bomb.”

On the eve of his inauguration, "moderate" Rouhani sent this message to Israel and the world: The Jewish state "has been a wound in the body of the Islamic world for years and should be removed". Ahmadinejad or Rouhani. It makes no difference: Tehran's nuclear zero hour spins closer and closer.





headline: World War II Vet Beaten to Death by Black Teens
byline: By Todd Starnes


An elderly World War II veteran was beaten to death outside a lodge in Spokane, Wash. and police said two black teenagers are suspect in the horrific crime.

JOIN TODD ON FACEBOOK FOR CONSERVATIVE NEWS! CLICK HERE!

Delbert Belton was left for dead outside the Eagles Lodge Wednesday night. The 89-year-old was on his way inside to shoot a game of pool when the two teenagers brutally attacked him and left him for dead.

He died Thursday morning at Sacred Heart Medical Center.photo1

"It does appear random. He was in the parking lot, it appears he was assaulted in the parking lot and there was no indication that he would have known these people prior to the assault," Spokane Police Major Crimes Detective Lieutenant Mark Griffiths told television station KXLY.

Belton was known as "Shorty" around the lodge. He served in the U.S. Army in the Pacific during WWII and was shot in the leg during the Battle of Okinawa. Belton's wife passed away several years ago.

Police told Fox News the suspects are described as two young black men of average build.

Folks, there sure does seem to be a lot of "random" attacks these days.





headline: How Normandy's lessons came alive for 12 lucky teens
byline: By Cate Lineberry


When I was asked to speak at the National World War II Museum this summer about my book “The Secret Rescue: An Untold Story of American Nurses and Medics Behind Nazi Lines,” I didn’t imagine that sitting in the front row would be twelve teenagers who already knew more about history than most adults learn in a lifetime.

These remarkable kids, all of whom were in 10th through 12th grade this past school year, had traveled from around the country to the sweltering heat of New Orleans, Louisiana, to participate in a unique opportunity designed to bring World War II history to life for students.

As members of the Normandy Academy, a pilot program created by the National World War II Museum and National History Day, each of the students—six boys and six girls—had spent the past few months studying the war and learning about a soldier from the same state who was killed on D-day.

They were now gathered at the museum in preparation for a trip to France to see the beaches where 150,000 Allied troops landed on June 6, 1944.

I realized the students’ research had already changed D-Day from a history lesson into a series of vivid stories of individuals who gave their lives for their country.

During this visit to New Orleans, they scoured the museum’s archives for further information on their fallen soldiers and spoke with World War II veterans.

They also saw some of the remarkable items from the museum’s collection, ranging from the boots of a German soldier to a Sherman tank, and talked with me about bringing history to life through research and storytelling.

During one of our meetings, I asked the students what had inspired them to join the program and to travel to France with a group of strangers. Many of them had never been overseas before and were looking forward to the experience, but the group’s overwhelming motivation was to learn as much as they could about the war.

These teenagers, for the most part, were history buffs who knew exactly where their grandfathers and great-grandfathers had served and their ranks.

Susanna Sigler, an 18-year-old from Northborough, Massachusetts, spoke of several members of her family involved in the war, including a grandmother who was a member of the Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps (WAAC).

Clyde Hurst, a 17–year-old from Arlington, Virginia, who plans to join the military, said he thought he’d learn more about the war from seeing the places firsthand rather than just reading about them, and added, “The stories of these men deserve to be told.”

Seventeen-year-old Andrew Beam, also from Arlington, Virginia, who grew up visiting Civil War sites, longed to see a World War II battlefield and to learn more about D-Day, one of his favorite historical subjects.

As we talked, I realized the students’ research had already changed D-Day from a history lesson into a series of vivid stories of individuals who gave their lives for their country.

London Westley, a 16-year-old from Chicago, Illinois, and one of two Junior Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (JROTC) members in the program, said that he had started to view these men “not as soldiers but as real men with personal lives. These were real people who changed the course of human history.”

That sense of transformation was underscored for me a few weeks later when I read one of the eulogies offered by the students for their soldiers at the Normandy American Cemetery.

“I do not know if Jordan R. Krummes was hit by a German bullet, or if he drowned in the unforgiving waters, but I do know that he proudly gave his life for his country,” wrote 17-year-old Natalie McDonald from San Pedro, California. “His sacrifice brought us all here today, and it is what has allowed us to stand where we are standing.”

I congratulate the Normandy Academy for offering this life-changing opportunity to students who will undoubtedly help keep the memory of these men alive—a sacred responsibility of all Americans.

As Sigler beautifully stated when she returned from the trip, “We must let others know of the sacrifices of these individuals, and to pass on the duty of memory to our children.”





headline: Liberty’s backlash -- why we should be grateful to Edward Snowden
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


Last week, Justin Amash, the two-term libertarian Republican congressman from Michigan, joined with John Conyers, the 25-term liberal Democratic congressman from the same state, to offer an amendment to legislation funding the National Security Agency (NSA). If enacted, the Amash-Conyers amendment would have forced the government’s domestic spies when seeking search warrants to capture Americans’ phone calls, texts and emails first to identify their targets and produce evidence of their terror-related activities before a judge may issue a warrant. The support they garnered had a surprising result that stunned the Washington establishment.

It almost passed.

The final vote, in which the Amash-Conyers amendment was defeated by 205 to 217, was delayed for a few hours by the House Republican leadership, which opposed the measure. The Republican leadership team, in conjunction with President Obama and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, needed more time for arm-twisting so as to avoid a humiliating loss.

But the House rank-and-file did succeed in sending a message to the big-government types in both parties: Nearly half of the House of Representatives has had enough of government spying and then lying about it, and understands that spying on every American simply cannot withstand minimal legal scrutiny or basic constitutional analysis.

The president is deeply into this and no doubt wishes he wasn’t. He now says he welcomed the debate in the House on whether his spies can have all they want from us or whether they are subject to constitutional requirements for their warrants. Surely he knows that the Supreme Court has ruled consistently since the time of the Civil War that the government is always subject to the Constitution, wherever it goes and whatever it does.

As basic as that sounds, it is not a universally held belief among the power elites. Gen. James Clapper, the current boss of all domestic spies, obviously lied when he testified under oath to a Senate committee recently that the government was not accumulating massive amounts of data about tens or hundreds of millions of Americans.

Gen. Keith Alexander, the head of the NSA, materially misled a House committee when he was asked under oath whether the NSA has the “ability” to listen to phone calls and he stated it lacks the “authority” to do so. Right off the bat, we can see that these senior spies do not feel bound by the laws prohibiting perjury and the misleading of Congress.

Congress itself has legislatively attempted to amend the Constitution, knowing that the supreme law of the land can only be amended by three-quarters of the states. The Constitution requires probable cause of criminal activity to be presented to a judge as a precondition of the judge issuing a search warrant. It also requires that the warrant particularly describe the place to be searched or the person or thing to be seized.

Yet, Congress told the secret FISA court that it can avoid the Constitution and issue a warrant to any spy looking for the phone calls and electronic communications of anyone in America, without probable cause, without naming the persons whose records are sought and without describing the place to be searched. Secrecy-smitten judges, whose clerks are NSA agents and who are not permitted to keep copies of their own rulings, have gone along with this.

Obama, who did not want a national debate on all this before Edward Snowden blew the whistle on it, has backed off of his earlier claims that the feds are not reading emails or listening to phone calls.

He has done this, no doubt, in light of unrefuted statements by Snowden and other NSA whistleblowers to the effect that federal spies can, with the press of a computer key, read emails and hear phone calls.

Only after the Snowden revelations did Obama welcome the "debate" in the House. That debate, in which more than half of his own party rejected his spying, lasted precisely 24 minutes.

How can a deliberative body of 434 current members debate an issue as monumental as whether the government is bound by the Constitution when it seeks out terrorists in just 24 minutes?

Apparently, the House Republican leadership that established the absurd 24-minute rule feared a serious and meaningful public discussion in which its authoritarian impulses would need to confront the Constitution its members swore to uphold. In that 24-minute time span, millions -- millions -- of Americans’ phone calls and emails were swept into the NSA’s supercomputers in defiance of the Constitution.

There is a political wildfire burning in the land, and we should all be grateful to Snowden for igniting it. The fire eventually will consume the political derelictions of those who have abandoned their oaths to uphold the Constitution so they can sound tough back home.

The Amash-Conyers amendment would have required the feds to tell the court the name of the person whose communications they seek and the evidence they have against that person -- just as the Constitution requires. And it would have prohibited the NSA dragnets the Constitution obviously was written to prevent.

Instead we have the almost unimaginable prospect and the nearly unthinkable reality of the feds claiming that they can legally put every person in America under their privacy-invading scrutiny in order to catch a few dozen evil ones -- most of whom were entrapped by the FBI in the first place and never posed a serious danger to the public or the nation.

Would we all be safer if the feds could knock down any door they wished and arrest any person they chose? Who would want to live in such a society? What value is the Constitution if those in whose hands we have reposed it for safekeeping are afraid to do so?

I expect that the Amash-Conyers amendment will be back on the floor of the House soon. When it is, who will have the courage to preserve, protect and defend personal liberty in a free society?





headline: Liberal media sharks continue feeding frenzy over ‘Zealot’ interview
byline: By Dan Gainor


The difference between the hard-left media and a school of sharks is … well, there isn’t much difference. Both get fighting mad and keep attacking when they smell blood in the water. (“Sharknado” jokes are on hold till the sequel.) That’s how left-wing sites like Huffington Post and Salon treat Fox News especially.

On Wednesday, Media Research Center President Brent Bozell (Hint #1: My boss) went on Fox (Hint #2: The owners of this website) to tear apart the latest media feeding frenzy.

It all involved a FoxNews.com Live interview of author Reza Aslan that upset the left like throwing chum in the water.

Fox New’s Lauren Green dared to ask Aslan if his Islamic faith impacted his book that totally denies the divinity of Jesus Christ – just accidentally the entire foundation for all branches of Christianity. Aslan got his immense ego bruised. Libs smelled blood and attacked.

Bozell criticized Aslan as “arrogant” (understatement), “absolutely false” (even more of an understatement) and “very biased” (duh). Cue the music from “Jaws” or “Shark Week.”

Lauren Green dared to ask author Reza Aslan if his Islamic faith impacted his new book about Jesus. Liberals smelled blood and attacked.

The Huffington Post reacted with vigor and its characteristically hyped headlines. Two versions of the same headline said either: “SURPRISE! Fox News Thinks This Went GREAT,” or “Fox News DEFENDS Disastrous Interview.” Weekly World News headline writers will always be able to find work with Arianna.

The headlines pointed to a story and a HuffPost Live piece that, once again, attacked Fox News.

HuffPost politics reporter Sabrina Siddiqui targeted her assault on the original interview, mocking “the flawed questioning” and saying it was part of the “double standard we see in this post 9/11 world.”

Host and former RT staffer Alyona Minkovski joined in, showing she believes Russian state propaganda is the perfect foundation for her professional journalism knowledge base. Minkovski called it “an incredibly embarrassing interview” and “absurd.” Minkovski clearly hasn’t watched RT recently.

Lefty Salon complained that “the Fox News propaganda machine continues to pump out more garbage.” Writer Prachi Gupta kept on chowing down on Fox nuggets. “Bozell’s mind-bogglingly backward interview confirms what Aslan said earlier today, that Fox News has an ‘inherent anti-Muslim bias,’” he wrote.

The libs at Slate, a product of your allegedly neutral Washington Post, had an almost identical headline to HuffPo: “Fox News Thinks Fox News Did a Great Job With That Reza Aslan Interview.” But hey, media group think never happens. Talking Points Memo, TV Newser, Mediaite and others followed.

Buzzfeed, the kitty lister site, naturally attacked Fox once again with its typical subtlety: “Fox News Tackles Most Embarrassing Interview Ever: Host Was Right To Question MuslimAuthor.” Surprisingly though, Buzzfeed also followed with a humorous piece on Aslan, “Author Attacked By Fox News Is Actually Kind Of A Jerk OnTwitter.” Yes, Aslan is the same arrogant jerk online that he is on TV. Shocker.

Buzzfeed’s Andrew Kaczynski listed (of course) 25 Twitter examples, most of which used various foul words (22 in the 25 posts) including 10 separate detonations of the F-bomb. The “scholarly” comments read more like he was applying to be spokesperson for the Weiner campaign or perhaps it was “Jersey Shore Islam.” Notably, Aslan called former House Speaker Newt Gingrich a “f***ing imbecile” without the polite asterisks.

The classy Aslan responded to the criticism on Twitter with more foul language and a new title for himself. “Seriously if calling hatemongers ‘assholes’ and trolls ‘shit for brains’ makes me a jerk then I proudly accept title #TwitterJerk,” he wrote. Who are we to argue? But why limit it just to Twitter?

The liberal response to Bozell’s comments was typical for the self-deluded. Yes, FNC's Lauren Green dared to question the bias of Muslim writer who attempted to undermine 2,000 years of religious history and belief. After all, Aslan could have been an Islamic writer criticizing Islam. Instead of a tough interview, he might have nabbed a fatwa or two.

Nah, that never happens. Just ask Salman Rushdie.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Will America soon fall, just as Rome did?
byline: By John Stossel


Unfortunately, the fall of Rome is a pattern repeated by empires throughout history ... including ours?

A group of libertarians gathered in Las Vegas recently for an event called “FreedomFest.” We debated whether America will soon fall, as Rome did.

Historian Carl Richard said that today’s America resembles Rome.

The Roman Republic had a constitution, but Roman leaders often ignored it. “Marius was elected consul six years in a row, even though under the constitution (he) was term-limited to one year.”

Here in America we've accomplished amazing things, but we shouldn’t take our continued success for granted.

Sounds like New York City’s Mayor Bloomberg.

“We have presidents of both parties legislating by executive order, saying I’m not going to enforce certain laws because I don’t like them. ... That open flouting of the law is dangerous because law ceases to have meaning. ... I see that today. ... Congress passes huge laws they haven’t even read (as well as) overspending, overtaxing and devaluing the currency.”

The Romans were worse. I object to President Obama’s $100 million dollar trip, but Nero traveled with 1,000 carriages.

Tiberius established an “office of imperial pleasures,” which gathered “beautiful boys and girls from all corners of the world” so, as Tacitus put it, the emperor “could defile them.”

Emperor Commodus held a show in the Colosseum at which he personally killed five hippos, two elephants, a rhinoceros and a giraffe.

To pay for their excesses, emperors devalued the currency. (Doesn’t our Fed do that by buying $2 trillion of government debt?)

Nero reduced the silver content of coins to 95 percent. Then Trajan reduced it to 85 percent and so on. By the year 300, wheat that once cost eight Roman dollars cost 120,000 Roman dollars.

The president of the Foundation for Economic Education, Lawrence Reed, warned that Rome, like America, had an expanding welfare state. It started with “subsidized grain. The government gave it away at half price. But the problem was that they couldn’t stop there ... a man named Claudius ran for Tribune on a platform of free wheat for the masses. And won. It was downhill from there.”

Soon, to appease angry voters, emperors gave away or subsidized olive oil, salt and pork. People lined up to get free stuff.

Rome’s government, much like ours, wasn’t good at making sure subsidies flowed only to the poor, said Reed: “Anybody could line up to get these goods, which contributed to the ultimate bankruptcy of the Roman state.”

As inflation increased, Rome, much like the U.S. under President Nixon, imposed wage and price controls. When people objected, Emperor Diocletian denounced their “greed,” saying, “Shared humanity urges us to set a limit.”

Doesn’t that sound like today’s anti-capitalist politicians?

Diocletian was worse than Nixon. Rome enforced controls with the death penalty -- and forbid people to change professions. Emperor Constantine decreed that those who broke such rules “be bound with chains and reduced to servile condition.”

Eventually, Rome’s empire was so large -- and people so resentful of centralized control -- that generals in outlying regions began declaring independence from Rome.

At FreedomFest, Matt Kibbe, president of the Tea Party group FreedomWorks, also argued that America could soon collapse like Rome did.

“The parallels are quite ominous -- the debt, the expansionist foreign policy, the arrogance of executive power taking over our country,” says Kibbe. “But I do think we have a chance to stop it.”

That’s a big difference between today’s America and yesterday’s Rome. We have movements like the tea party and libertarianism and events like FreedomFest that alert people to the danger in imperial Washington and try to fight it. If they can wake the public, we have hope.

The triumph of liberty is not inevitable, though. And empires do crumble.

Rome’s lasted the longest. The Ottoman Empire lasted 623 years. China’s Song, Qing and Ming dynasties each lasted about 300 years.

We’ve lasted just 237 years so far -- sometimes behaving like a republic and sometimes an empire. In that time, we’ve accomplished amazing things, but we shouldn’t take our continued success for granted.

Freedom and prosperity are not natural. In human history, they’re rare.





headline: Don't let ObamaCare debate derail search for lifesaving medical cures
byline: By Douglas E. Schoen


In one of their final votes before heading home for Congress’ annual summer recess, House Republicans voted to repeal ObamaCare – for the 40th time. 

While this bill will not go any further with the Democratic-controlled Senate than their last 39 attempts, the Republicans’ repeated efforts to vocalize their staunch opposition to the Affordable Care Act demonstrate how controversial the policy remains. 

The fight over Obama’s health care law will only become more heated when Congress reconvenes, as the new state insurance marketplaces – a signature piece of Obama’s law – are set to open for enrollment shortly thereafter. 

Some Republican Congressmen now say that unless the law is defunded, they will not pass a budget, which is needed to fund the government beyond September 30 in order to avoid a government shutdown.

Currently 444 new medicines and treatments are being tested by America’s biopharmaceutical research companies to treat and possibly even prevent a variety of debilitating neurological disorders.

This partisan bickering is unproductive for our country and, more importantly, preventing us from addressing the real challenges facing our nation. 

Democrats and Republicans need to replace political fights over the budget and efforts to defund ObamaCare with the development of a pro-growth agenda that focuses on economic development, jobs, and innovation. 

Yet while our political leaders continue to fight about the details and implementation of a bill that was passed three years ago, radical achievements in other areas of health care are being overshadowed. 

A report released last week revealed there are currently 444 new medicines and treatments being tested by America’s biopharmaceutical research companies to treat and possibly even prevent a variety of debilitating neurological disorders.

There are over 600 neurological disorders affecting millions of Americans every year. Some of these disorders are well known such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Multiple Sclerosis, while others are more obscure, but they are all severely crippling. In addition to physical suffering, these disorders cause both patients and their families immense pain and hardship, and cost the U.S. government billions of dollars. 

Alzheimer’s disease (the most common form of dementia) is currently the sixth leading cause of death in the United States and affects roughly 5.4 million people. Without effective treatment, that number is expected to triple by 2050. The current cost of care of Alzheimer’s patients to American society is $203 billion dollars -- a figure that is projected to increase to $1.2 trillion by 2050.

Recently, however, serious advances have been made in the treatment of neurological disorders. The boundaries of medical and scientific research are being pushed to new extremes, paving the way to innovative products that could potentially reverse the effects of or even prevent these devastating diseases entirely, reducing the overall cost to American society.

Among the 444 medicines in development are a few that represent truly revolutionary scientific approaches to medicine.

For instance, several of these new medicines and treatments are using gene therapy to repair and restore damaged cells, enabling doctors to treat neurological disorders by replacing mutated genes or inactivating mutated genes that cause debilitating symptoms.

A similar therapy, “Targeted RNAi Therapy,” is also in clinical testing stages.

In addition to providing patients and their families with hope, these groundbreaking scientific methods are helping researchers to understand more about the genes that affect the development of particular neurological disorders. 

A deeper understanding here could potentially lead to new ways of slowing or even reversing the effects of these diseases, which would cut costs significantly.

According to the report, delaying the onset of Alzheimer’s by just 5 years could reduce the cost of care by $447 billion in 2050.

At a time when the implementation of health care reform remains a point of contention between the Democrats and Republicans, it is critical that we do not let these types of innovative medical achievements go unnoticed, or lose focus on the need for a continued national commitment to develop new, lifesaving medicines and treatments.

The persistent efforts of biopharmaceutical scientists in America have brought cutting-edge treatment options to patients, lessening the physical and emotional burdens of these disabling neurological diseases, and improving their overall quality of life. 

This in turn has significant impact on the efficiency and cost effectiveness of our health care system. 

We simply cannot let ongoing battles surrounding our country’s health care system and the budget to allow us to lose sight of the importance of developing new medicines and treatments, and on medical innovation.





headline: Kerry, Obama, Middle East peace talks and meaningless concessions
byline: By Cal Thomas


Egypt is in turmoil again. Syria is embroiled in civil war. Iran continues building a nuclear device. Militants in Iraq have killed more than 4,000 people so far this year, more than 800 of them in July alone, according to the aptly named Iraq Body Count.

And what is Secretary of State John Kerry's focus? It is the never-ending Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Again facing U.S. pressure, Israel has agreed to renewed peace talks. It rejected demands from the Palestinian side for withdrawal from "occupied" lands and the freezing of new "settlements" as preconditions, but Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu did agree to release 104 Palestinian prisoners, most of them convicted of murdering Israeli civilians in terrorist acts, "in stages" and "in accordance with the circumstances of their progress" in the peace negotiations.

Let me assume the role of an Old Testament prophet and declare: There will be no progress, because the Palestinian side will accept nothing less than the complete annihilation of Israel and the removal of every Jew from what they regard as their land.

Let me assume the role of prophet and declare: There will be no peace talk progress, because the Palestinian side will accept nothing less than the complete annihilation of Israel.

Let's put it in a way most people would understand. If you find a serial killer has broken into your home, would you negotiate with him, or would you defend yourself with your registered gun?

In announcing Israel's participation in negotiations, Netanyahu issued "an open letter to Israeli citizens." In it, he called those he would release from prison "depraved people." They are not likely to become less depraved after their release. Like most terrorists, there is a high probability they will rejoin the battle to obliterate Israel.

The prime minister also said: "In the next nine months, we will consider whether there is a Palestinian element opposite us that, like us, truly wants to end the conflict between us." Save your breath. There isn't, because the Palestinian definition of ending the conflict is simple: They win.

As for the promise that prisoners will be released should negotiations progress, let's see how that has worked in the past.

Middle East expert Daniel Pipes has listed some of them:

- In 1985, Israel exchanged 1,150 prisoners for three captured Israelis.

- In 2000, Israel exchanged 450 Arab prisoners for three Israeli bodies and one live hostage.

- In 2008, five Arab prisoners, including, writes Pipes, "the psychopath Samir al-Kuntar" and 199 Arab bodies were swapped for two Israeli bodies.

- And in 2011, 1,027 Palestinian prisoners were given up for one man, Gilad Schalit.

In none of these exchanges was the so-called "peace process" advanced. The Palestinians, seemingly, get what they want by not conceding anything. Nor are they forced to live up to their promises and agreements. Israel does all the conceding and gets nothing in return, except more terror and new threats of war.

In 2010, a poll sponsored by The Israeli Project, a Jewish-American organization, found most Palestinians refuse to accept the idea of Israel as a Jewish state and that while some accept the concept of two states, they regard it as a first step toward one state ruled by Palestinians.

In the face of so much evidence that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will not be ended by more Israeli concessions and prisoner releases, why is Secretary of State Kerry continuing to pursue what hasn't worked and can't work, given the ideological and religious motivations of the Palestinian side?

Maybe it's because this administration has no foreign policy and pressuring Israel is as close as it can get to one. Meanwhile, the rest of the Middle East burns.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Why Christie and Paul deserve our thanks
byline: By Richard Grenell


A healthy debate is unfolding within the Republican Party on foreign policy and national security. While the national media pretends the same debate isn’t happening on the left, Republicans are openly engaging in an internal debate from the House floor to the editorial pages of our daily newspapers. 

In a time of domestic belt-tightening to reign in government deficits topping $16 trillion, many are raising a critical question: can the United States continue to afford its status as a global leader, or can it not afford to lose it.

This debate is nothing new.

Foreign aid, though less than 1% of the annual federal budget, is often a hard case to make to constituents who are rightfully worried about domestic and economic issues.

In the 2012 primary season, this debate threatened to rupture the otherwise tightly-formed foreign policy consensus up and down the GOP ticket. 

Despite the media’s unwillingness to have a nuanced and sustained conversation, the Republican Party should continue to debate the future of America’s world standing. 

Congressman Ron Paul, a long-time critic of U.S. foreign policy and intervention, was joined by Texas Governor Rick Perry and others in questioning the merits of U.S. assistance to countries like Turkey, a NATO ally since 1952, and Egypt, the long-time foothold of US support in the Islamic world.

These calls are a far cry from the foreign policy strategies of Presidents Eisenhower, Reagan, and Bush 41. Commencing with the massive foreign aid packages under the Truman Doctrine, which enabled the global fight against Soviet influence, and continuing through the Cold War and into the modern era, foreign aid has long been a staple of the United States’ attempts to gain access to and influence with leaders in the developing world.

This money has bought America permission for military bases in every corner of the globe, unfettered access for American consumers to emerging trade markets, and remarkable influence in world affairs. As a result, America has been able to be a “shining city upon the hill,” as Reagan envisioned.

But as globalization has changed the landscape of world affairs, so too has it changed the efficacy of America’s foreign policy strategy. 

China, Russia, and others are competing with American interests by offering their own style of aid to compete with ours. 

There was a story that was retold around the State Department during my days in the Bush administration whereby a non-specific African country had stronger feelings and loyalties to the government of China than to America. The reason: China had provided aid for a soccer stadium, while the U.S. had only been providing food and supplies for decades. 

Sadly, our years of humanitarian and military aid have been taken for granted, doing little to change how people actually feel about America – even with the worldwide phenomenon known as Barack Obama. 

When we look at these problems next to the $16.7 trillion U.S. national debt, it's clear that unconditional foreign aid is no longer smart. 

Though the State Department has discussed options such as better branding of food and supplies to identify American support, it is clear that our decades-long charity effort is failing to bring about the results we expected. 

U.S. foreign aid must be used more strategically to achieve our national security goals. Anyone who thinks we should continue in the same manner is out of touch with the reality of a changing world. 

Echoing his father’s long-time opposition to U.S. interventionism, Senator Rand Paul has voiced concerns with U.S. aid to Egypt, our drone policy, and America’s place in world affairs. 

His followers brought the debate surrounding drones to the House Floor, dividing the Republican caucus. 

On the other end of the spectrum is New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, who on several recent occasions has questioned the recent trend of fiscally conservative Republicans bucking GOP security traditions, invoking victims of 9/11 and calling it a “dangerous thought.” Christie’s call for more spending has also riled some in the GOP.

So how to proceed? The answer is somewhere in the middle. Foreign aid, a fraction of total U.S. spending and more than thirty times less than the amount we spend on military obligations every year, is a relative bargain for the foreign influence we must maintain to keep American safe and secure. 

Nevertheless, we can’t lose sight of the fact that we must live within our means and that foreign aid, like domestic spending, must not go to failing or unaffordable programs.

When he established the Millennial Challenge Corporation in 2004, President George W. Bush created the first ever process to condition U.S. aid upon a country’s ability to fundamentally reform. 

Bush wanted recipient governments to move towards transparent, democratic, and functional institutions before getting U.S. aid. 

Today, we should go further than President Bush’s original idea by requiring a zero-based budgeting approach to foreign aid and require recipient countries to annually ask for specific assistance. 

Foreign aid should not be automatic.

Countries should have to make their case every year and American officials should openly decide what, if anything, to fund.

Despite the media’s unwillingness to have a nuanced and sustained conversation, the Republican Party should continue to debate the future of America’s world standing.

Regardless of how divided the party seems now, we should continue to wrestle with these serious policy issues. 

The discussion will once again be temporarily settled when the party picks its 2016 nominee, but for now, let the debate rage on.





headline: Congress must help America's drivers and ditch Renewable Fuel Standard
byline: By Thomas J. Pyle


Only in Washington can an expensive, unnecessary regulation be considered common sense.

The Obama administration is digging in its heels when it comes to repealing harmful energy regulations that increase consumer costs with little benefit to the environment.

The Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) is a classic example of hugely misguided energy policy, but to the Obama administration and its environmentalist allies, the RFS is a beneficial regulation aimed at curbing emissions and safeguarding against climate change.

The Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) is a classic example of hugely misguided energy policy.

What they don’t say, but mean, is that it artificially drives up the cost of gasoline and when that happens, people can’t afford to drive as much. Remember how energy prices need to “skyrocket?”

Well, they are.

“The backbone of our policy is the Renewable Fuel Standard,” said top Obama energy adviser Heather Zichal at an event last week, adding that “calls to repeal the standard are nothing but shortsighted.”

Lest there be any doubters in the room, Zichal went on to add that the White House is confident the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) can oversee the law and any subsequent market challenges.

Perhaps, however, Zichal and other RFS-proponents are the shortsighted ones.

When the RFS was enacted under the Bush administration, it hinged on the assumption that gasoline demand would rise year after year. If Americans were using more gasoline, the thinking went, blending fuel with more and more ethanol would be a fairly painless exercise: ethanol content would rise right along with consumption.

Yet policymakers never factored in a downturn in the economy and declining demand for transportation fuels that began in 2007 and continues today.

The RFS, however, abides as the law of the land, leaving Americans stuck with an adverse policy that Washington is unwilling to correct.

Unfortunately, the consequences of inaction are hitting the economy hard. For starters, refiners are up against what’s known as the “blend wall” – the point at which mandated ethanol levels exceed the amount companies are willing to use or sell to consumers.

So far, refiners have been able to comply with the RFS because the ethanol mandate – 13.2 billion gallons in 2012 – has been equal to or less than 10 percent of total gasoline consumption in the U.S.

But that’s about to change.

In order to keep up with the rising RFS mandate, the EPA has approved a new fuel blend with a higher ethanol content known as E15.

Yet refiners are reluctant to use E15, mainly because automakers have said the blend can corrode older and smaller engines. Many car companies, including Toyota, Nissan and BMW, have said car damage due to “improper fueling” voids any warranties. That’s not much of an incentive for refiners to try to sell E15 to customers.

Perhaps the the worst consequence of the RFS is the skyrocketing price of Renewable Identification Numbers (RINs), which are credits that refiners must purchase in exchange for not blending ethanol into gasoline. As with any good in limited supply that is in high demand, the prices of RIN’s are soaring.

Earlier this month they reached record highs, and currently remain near $1.40. In January 2013, prices were below 10 cents a RIN. A 1400% price increase in six months is something only the government can do.

These increased costs are being passed on to consumers.

Last week, the average cost of a gallon of regular gas was $3.64. That marked a 15-cent rise over the previous week, and 24 cents more than the average one year earlier.

Anyone claiming higher RIN prices have nothing to do with rising gas prices is either blind or fooling themselves. Moreover, corn prices are also rising due to crops being diverted from food supplies to ethanol production.

The RFS is a perfect example of a short-sighted government policy gone wrong. Its advocates can’t see beyond their intransigent commitment to the biofuels industry, which is fattening with each passing day thanks to soaring profits. Unfortunately, not everybody is reaping the benefits.

In the case of the RFS, E15 is putting American drivers in danger, while rising RIN prices are pushing up the prices of gas and food.

Congress has the opportunity to act, and work to fix a bipartisan mistake with a bipartisan solution. Indeed, it’s time to put pressure on the EPA to acknowledge the fatal flaw of the RFS – Americans are using less gasoline – and reverse course.

Recently, two different House committees held hearings on the impacts of the RFS. That the RFS is unworkable is a no-brainer. It remains to be seen if Congress or the EPA will come to their senses and help American motorists who are feeling the squeeze.





headline: Five observations about Egypt chaos
byline: By Tom Rogan


The bloodletting continues.

While the Egyptian government claims that around 650 people have been killed so far, correspondentssuggestthat fatalities have already exceeded 1,000. Here are five observations:

1.What we’re witnessing in Egypt stands in stark opposition to the most defining of American interests – the advance of human freedom.

If we’re to preach democracy as the emancipator of mankind, freedom requires our unbending defense. It cannot be left to rot in subjectivity -- a blessing only for those who meet our natural ideological approval. That is the path to a rank hypocrisy.

Recognizing this reality, our current policy in Egypt is unfit for the task.

President Obama seems unable to realize that American leadership will require more than carefully calibrated words. We lack credibilitywith Egyptians because our policy is devoid of conviction.

This must change.

The president must impose a new understanding upon the Egyptian military – a cognizance that painful consequences will follow their continued thuggery.

America’s reaction to the street grinding has, so far, been pathetic – the simple cancellation ofBright Star (amilitary exercise).

We need to bare our teeth. We must reduce our provision of financial aid to the generals -- offering the prospect of a renewal if they mollify their behavior and pursue national rapprochement.

2. Some commentators aresuggestingthat the answer to this crisis lies with the deployment of militaryliaisonofficers to Egypt. They claim thatlongstanding tiesbetween U.S. and Egyptian militaries would allow U.S. officers to produce a tempering influence.

This is wishful thinking.

Yes, some senior U.S. military and Egyptian military officers have personal relationships. Yes, these relationships do, onoccasion,have influence.

This being said, personal relationships won't be able todissuadethe generals away from those actions that they're determined to pursue.

The Egyptian senior officer corps already know that they're infuriating the U.S. government.Nevertheless, they're persisting upon their present course.

This tells us something -- American military officers are not going to be able to stop the crackdown.

As noted in my first point, in the end, only resolute U.S. government action can influence what the Egyptian military does and does not do.

3. TheMuslim Brotherhoodshares some responsibility for the continuing bloodshed. For one major example,many churcheshave been attacked byBrotherhoodsupporters.

Again, there's a sustaining truth in the various faces of this chaos. Different political extremists are targeting innocent civilians as they seek to implement their competing agendas.

Ourcondemnationsand flowing responses must be matched to every atrocity. Not just against those which immediately reach the western news.

4. The Egyptian emergency is incorporating an increasingly sectarian-existential nature. Just as the Brotherhood continues to take to the streets against the government, opposing movements areformingvigilante groups.

As Shadi Hamidexplains, theBrotherhoodis highly unlikely to submit in quiet acquiescence.

If sectarian battles continue to erupt, the consequences are likely to be catastrophic.

At their defining level, hostile sectarian politics are vested in emotional hatreds rather than logical political agendas. The more they exacerbate, the greater the risks of bloodshed become. Just look atwhat happenedin Iraq during late 2006.

5. I fear that this crisis may usher the arrival of a 'Salafist Spring.'

Inside Egypt and beyond its borders, many will regard the on-going military action as proof that their political ambitions are unattainable through peaceful, democratic engagement.

In short, they'll believe that democracy is the preserve of secular elites. This presents us with a major challenge.

For a start, democratic rejectionism merges perfectly with traditional Sunni extremist considerations of democracy -- as anintrinsically immoral undertaking.

As a result, Egyptian terrorist groups like theEgyptian Islamic Jihad(united withAl Qaeda) and theGaI/Islamic Groupare likely to prosper from a well of new recruits (in the case of the GaI,political moderationis likely to slow dramatically or halt).

The Brotherhood may become the new moderates.

Unfortunately, this is only one side of the problem.

Across the region, Salafi jihadist groups are growing instrength. In Iraq, TheIslamic State of Iraq and Syria(ISIS)istaking advantageof Sunnidisaffectionwith the government of Prime Minister Maliki.

As wewitnessed Thursday in Beirut, in Lebanon and Syria, other Sunni extremist organizations areflourishingamidst anger atHezbollah’s sectarian brutality. But even as they incubate in local grievances, wherever their particular groups are located, Salafi extremist leaders have a shared and overriding objective – the establishment of a supranational Islamic caliphate.

In essence, a movement unencumbered by the notion of national borders and propelled by a unifying agenda. Galvanized by the footage from Egypt, increasingly energized Salafi extremism is likely to follow. Taking ISIS as a template, we should expect a security nightmare.

To mitigate this threat, the Obama administration must spare no effort in helping to cajole, nudge and if necessary, push Egypt onto a path of reconciliation.

Unless and until all Egyptians feel they have a democratically vested stake in their futures, the prospects for a just and durable peace will remain subordinated to the fire.





headline: What would Martin Luther King say about Trayvon, race  America in 2013?
byline: By Kelly Wright


Editor's note: Due to an editing error, the original version of the following op-ed incorrectly characterized Trayvon Martin's death as a "murder."A Florida jury ruled that George Zimmerman did not murder Trayvon Martin.

On August 28, Americans will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the famous "March on Washington."

In 1963, Dr. Martin Luther King, Junior stood on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial and delivered one of the most dramatic speeches of his lifetime. His "I Have A Dream" speech before 200,000 gathered on the Washington Mall was emotionally stirring, intellectually insightful, and spiritually enlightening.

Dr. King, a dedicated Baptist minister with brilliant oratory skills, the academic prowess of a scholar, and the wisdom of an ancient sage, faithfully and courageously challenged America to embrace his dream of a better, stronger and united America.

King dreamed of a day that black children and white children would live in a nation where they would not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.

He made an earnest appeal to all men and women from all faiths, nationalities and ethnicity to embrace freedom and justice for all.

Dr. King would seek to elevate, motivate and demonstrate God's view for healing the painful wounds of the past and bridge the deep divide with the bonds of reconciliation.

If Dr. King were alive today, he would be 84. What kind of America would he see?

How would he respond to the heated racial debate in the land stemming from the death of Trayvon Martin and the not guilty verdict in the George Zimmerman trial?

What would he do to address the black on black crime in our cities?

What would King say about the racial disparities in health, education, employment and incarceration?

What would King say about the role of the Church in all of this?

Based on the speeches, essays, letters and books that Dr. King has written, I believe today he would take note of the various extreme points of view being discussed in today's public square

He would listen to people agitate, bloviate, instigate and aggravate. Then he would seek to elevate, motivate and demonstrate God's view for healing the painful wounds of the past and bridge the deep divide with the bonds of reconciliation.

In 1963, as he sat in a Birmingham jail, he wrote about becoming an extremist to deal with the extreme issues of hate and division.

He advised Americans to become more like Jesus as an extremist in love -- "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, pray for them who despitefully use you."

King posed a question to all Americans; should we become extremists of hate or extremists of love?

In terms of education, Dr. King would continue to strongly encourage African-Americans to view education as the gateway out of poverty.

King applauded the constant streams of African-mericans who were completing college. But today, he would be concerned about the rising trend towards illiteracy in the black community.

Dr. Howard Fuller, co-founder of the faith-based Black Alliance for Educational Options poignantly put it this way: "On February 6, 1960, four black students from North Carolina AT College go to a segregated lunch counter at Woolworths in Greensboro and demand to be served. Today in 2013, four black students who are now welcome at the lunch counter sit down and can't read the menu. How does that happen?"

Fuller, who drew inspiration from his parents and Dr. King to seek an education and rise from the housing projects of Milwaukee, Wisconsin to eventually become the city's first Black Superintendent of Schools believes King would be disappointed by the state of education in the black community.

Indeed, in his address to the Golden Anniversary Conference of the National Urban League in 1960, King sighted the steady decline of crippling illiteracy as a major factor in the rapid educational advances among blacks.

He believed education, along with faith in God, and a non-violent struggle against oppression would broaden the thinking of black Americans, provide a larger view of the world, but also a larger view of themselves. Sadly, some of us have taken our eyes off the prize.

Dr. King would be troubled by the current and disturbing trends of violence in the black community.

He would be heartbroken to see the alarming rate of black on black violence in Chicago, Detroit, Baltimore, Philadelphia, New Orleans, and other urban areas. He would likely conduct peace marches through the heart of these killing fields.

He would challenge all Americans; but particularly blacks to do something about the violence; to increase the peace on the streets in urban America.

In an article he wrote for Ebony magazine in 1966 titled "Nonviolence: The Only Road to Freedom in 1966, King sounded the alarm that it is a moral imperative to be non-violent: "Only a refusal to hate or kill can put an end to the chains of violence in the world and lead us toward a community where men can live together without fear. Our goal is to create a beloved community."

As King addressed the issues of his time and promoted a society of brotherhood, he wanted to avoid being looked upon as a super and unrealistic optimist in an age of cynicism and pessimism.

He wrote on page 64 of his book, "Struggle to Love": As we struggle to defeat the forces of evil, the God of the universe struggles with us. Evil dies on the seashore, not merely because of man's endless struggle against it, but because of God's power to defeat it."

Dr. King did, and still does, encourage all of us to come to the table of brotherhood, to discuss our differences openly and honestly, to work and pray for a peace that surpasses all understanding.

Dr. King would remind us that in everything we do, we must act in love. Not in some sort of sentimental love.

He explained it would be difficult for men to love their enemies or oppressors in an affectionate sense. Because of that, he pushed the concept of Agape love. He explained that Agape love is not sentimental or affectionate, but is a reciprocal love.

A person will love out of a redeeming good will for mankind. It is the kind of sacrificial love that seeks nothing in return.

King wrote in "Facing The Challenge of A New Age," ...on the Agape level we love men not because we like them, not because their attitudes and ways appeal to us, but because God loves us. Here we rise to the position of loving the person who does the evil deed while hating the deed that the person does...we will be able to stand...with dignity and discipline." 

As a child, I recall being excited to hear Dr. King speak. His words resonated with the same hopeful message that I received from June, my single parent mother.

Their words spoke promise into my soul. They made me feel that if I maintained my faith in God, gained knowledge of the world through a good education, plus worked hard in my career, and then I could accomplish anything.

My mother fervently believed that. She frequently used the words of Dr. King, the Bible, and her own wisdom to help me along my rocky journey to manhood.

One quote from Dr. King that my mother often shared with me is something we should all consider living by, "If I can help somebody as I travel on, if I can help somebody with a word or a song, If I can help somebody who is traveling wrong, then my living will not be in vain."

Now is the time to help somebody. Now is the time to follow in King’s footsteps and become drum majors for peace. Now is the time for us to “live together as brothers or perish together as fools.”





headline: US is allowing Syria to slaughter the innocent
byline: By Benny Avni


By using chemical weapons to kill more than 1,000 civilians recently, the Syrian army didn’t just flip the bird to President Obama on the one-year anniversary, to the day, of his thundering “red line” announcement against the use of chems.

It also gave the middle finger to the United Nations, the West and the “global community” — because the attack came just two days after a UN team of inspectors arrived in Damascus to “investigate” months-old allegations of chemical-weapons use.

And so the once-remotely-possible notion that Obama, or the United Nations, might bring some order to Syria — a country that’s already seen more than 100,000 killed, where millions have been made refugees and where chaos and slaughter continue unabated — stands exposed as farce.

Reports by Syrian rebels — bolstered by horrific video clips depicting children, women and elderly suffocating to death — allege that the Syrian Army used chemicals in two eastern and one western suburb of Damascus.

Obama's doctrine: Never mind the red lines. Let Syria burn.

The Syrian government, as usual, denied the allegations. Washington officials say they need to study them. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said he was “shocked.” The Security Council convened an “emergency” session — which was foredoomed to failure, since Russia blocks any action against its Syrian ally.

So the rebel leaders (of all factions) who called on the United Nations and others to act were wasting their breath.

It was last Aug. 21 that Obama said that a red line for him would be if Syria’s vast chemical-arms caches started “moving around,” or “being utilized,” then “that would change my calculus; that would change my equation.”

Well, Obama’s foreign doctrine (benign neglect, or perhaps just hopeless uncertainty) hasn’t changed one iota in the year that passed.

Never mind the red lines. Let Syria burn.

As the chairman of the joint chiefs, Gen. Martin Dempsey, told the Associated Press yesterday, the United States could easily take out all of Syria’s air assets, and do so essentially by remote control. But it won’t, because by now we believe that if the rebels take power, they won’t support American interests.

Meanwhile, the UN chemical experts arrived Monday. Headed by the Swedish scientist Ake Sellstrom, the group is there to investigate past allegations of chemical-weapons use.

The push for UN inspectors started back in March, but it took months to work out a deal whereby Assad’s regime would let the inspectors in. Even then, the Syrians limited the team’s visitation rights to just three sites — and experts tell me that, after such a long time, traces of chemical munitions will be almost impossible to detect.

And fat chance the Syrians will let the team anywhere near the scenes of yesterday’s atrocities, as America asked yesterday in a closed-door Security Council session.

But even if, by some miracle, the inspectors do find evidence of chem use, nothing changes: Sellstrom’s mandate, as dictated by the Security Council, is only to determine whether weapons were used — not who used them.

So Syria’s defender, Russia, will have enough ammunition to stop any Security Council action.And Obama, hiding behind the UN, will continue to stay above the Syrian fray.

And pro-jihadi Gulf states will continue to support increasingly radicalized rebel groups while Russia, Iran and Hezbollah continue to support the ever-radicalized Assad regime.

So the slaughter will only grow worse.

Is that, as Dempsey framed it, in America’s interest?











headline: What exactly is your foreign policy, Mr. Obama?
byline: By Cal Thomas


"We maintain the peace through our strength; weakness only invites aggression." -- Ronald Reagan, March 23, 1983

President Reagan's speech to the nation 30 ago launched a major arms buildup to confront the expanding military power and political aspirations of the Soviet Union. It followed the disastrous presidency of Jimmy Carter, whose nonperformance during the Iran hostage crisis led to the perception in the Muslim world that America was weak and had lost its resolve to confront enemies.

President Obama appears to believe killing Usama bin Laden, which he mentioned for the umpteenth time at his Friday news conference, and conducting drone strikes against terrorists in Yemen and elsewhere is enough to deter terrorists.

Now comes another threat.

The London Times reports Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe, who, in addition to his history of stealing elections and confiscating the land of white farmers, has signed an agreement with the Iranian regime to supply it with raw materials that can be used to make a nuclear weapon.

Obama appears to believe killing Bin Laden and conducting drone strikes against terrorists in Yemen and elsewhere is enough to deter terrorists.

Weren't we assured that Iran wants nuclear power only to provide electricity to its people? Have we learned nothing from past behavior?

Tyrants lie and Islamic tyrants are instructed to lie to "infidels" by their "holy book" in the pursuit of earthly objectives, even world domination, according to some interpretations of the Koran.

As the Times reports: "[Iran] is fond of declaring its near self-sufficiency in uranium supplies for its disputed nuclear program. As with many announcements by Tehran, however, those claims have only a slender basis in reality. It does have substantial uranium deposits and its largest uranium mine was opened recently amid great fanfare, but deposits are of poorer quality than those found elsewhere."

Enter Mugabe, whose struggling economy has recently begun to show signs of life. "The European Union only recently lifted sanctions against 81 officials and eight companies in Zimbabwe," notes Times writer Michael Evans. "These sanctions imposed in 2002 for human rights abuses and political violence remain in force ..." Sanctions have not deterred Iran in its pursuit of a nuclear weapon.

What now?

There is talk of a response by the "international community," which is neither international in its thinking nor a community in its fight against terrorism. As usual, any response will have to come from the United States, NATO and/or Israel.

Given President Obama's ordered withdrawal from corrupt Afghanistan and U.S. public opinion mostly opposed to additional "foreign entanglements," it falls to the president to lead. Leading is not something Obama has done well.

Consider his failed "outreach" to the Muslim world and his equally ineffective "reset" with Russia. In 2009, then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton produced a red button, which she and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, pressed. The Russian word for "reset" was wrongly translated as "overloaded." Was that prophetic symbolism?

Can anyone articulate this president's foreign policy and point to where it is working?

In a column for the Sunday Telegraph titled, "Obama's not to be trusted on foreign policy," Janet Daley writes, "But there must be at least a glimmering of doubt even in Europe -- where the Obama presidency has been given an absurdly easy ride -- that America, too, is adrift in the post-Cold War landscape: that it no longer has any clear conception of its global role."
Endless speeches by the president are not a policy.

It bears restating that the Ayatollah Khomeini believed in the strength and resolve of Ronald Reagan. That is why on the day of Reagan's 1981 inauguration he released 52 American hostages held for 444 days. Strong individuals deter bullies. Strong nations deter enemies and keep the peace.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Why Pope John XXIII is on the road to sainthood
byline: By Bishop John McCarthy


Pope Francis declared this summer that two of his predecessors, Popes John XXIII and John Paul II have lived documentably holy lives and are entitled to the hallowed title of saints!

No one has to be reminded about the life of Pope John Paul II. He was dramatically on the scene until less than a decade ago. While he was here on Earth, he accomplished wonders as he moved around the planet calling people to faithfulness and the world to peace. 

Pope John XXIII had served earlier and his life ended in 1963. 

His election was a surprise.

It followed the long reign of Pope Pius XII and most likely the cardinals were looking for someone who would not be in office too long. 

John XXIII was relaxed, down to earth and mixed easily with every strata of society.  

There were extraordinary, new forces swirling around our battered planet: Eastern Europe was controlled by the Communists. The so-called Third World was trying to do a balancing act between the United States and its Allies and the Soviet Union. 

The Cardinals elected a man who was 77-years-old. 

They were right on one thing. It was a short pontificate. 

He led the Catholic Church for just five years but he was both a leader and a visionary.

As a young man, Pope John had served as a soldier in the Italian Army in the First World War. 

After becoming a priest, he was assigned to the Papal Diplomatic Corps and served in a number of important but difficult spots in the Balkans.

He was Papal Ambassador to France and then was appointed as a Cardinal Archbishop of Venice and then in 1958, he was elected to be the 261 Successor of St. Peter.

The world immediately fell in love with this venerable Holy Pontiff. 

He was relaxed, down to earth and mixed easily with every strata of society. 

He never forgot his roots.

Born and raised in the Italian Alps, he stayed very close to his family. 

His family members would occasionally come down to Rome to visit their famous relative and the delightful thing about that is that they would always bring their own food and a little extra for him.

At that time, the Vatican seemed to be enjoying a quiet and peaceful period and then suddenly, at a relatively unimportant liturgical event at the Vatican, John XXIII announced that he was calling an Ecumenical Council. He said he would convene all of the bishops of the world to a meeting in the Vatican.

In the Catholic Church, such a Council is extremely important but a none too frequent event. 

In fact, there have only been 20 Ecumenical Councils in the first 2,000 years. 

Middle level Church leaders were startled. What would a Council do? 

Some of the biggest struggles in the history of the Catholic Church were between world councils and reigning pontiffs.

Yet, John XXIII sailed serenely on. And so on October 11, 1962 more than 2,500 bishops from around the world met at St. Peter’s to begin the Second Vatican Council. 

The bishops would meet for approximately four months a year for the next four years to produce a number of extraordinary documents that would to a great extent change the way the Church was functioning in the 20th century. 

The changes they agreed on generated both great enthusiasm and great tension among the faithful. Even today, more than 50 years later, the tension has not completely subsided.

In addition to his extraordinary act of convening the Council, he also wrote two extraordinarily important encyclicals that have had a dramatic impact on the Church itself and the relationship of the Church to the world. 

These two documents are Mater et Magistra (Mother and Teacher) in 1961 and Pacem en Terris (Peace on Earth) in 1963. 

These are truly remarkable documents that developed in much greater detail the Church’s commitment to helping to develop more just and equitable societies and economies. 

They are still basic policy statements of the Catholic Church regarding social issues.

Many of us are hopeful that Pope Francis will call yet another Council to resolve some of the issues that are still not completely resolved.





headline: Beware warrior cops
byline: By John Stossel


We need police to catch murderers, thieves and con men, and so we give them special power -- the power to use force on others. Sadly, today’s police use that power to invade people’s homes over accusations of trivial, nonviolent offenses -- and often do it with tanks, battering rams and armor you’d expect on battlefields.

In his book “Rise of the Warrior Cop,” Radley Balko recounts the rise of police SWAT teams (SWAT stands for Special Weapons And Tactics) armed with heavy military equipment. SWAT raids began as rarely used methods of dealing with violent situations, like hostage-takings.

But government always grows.

In the 1970s, there were about 300 SWAT raids per year. “As of 2005,” says Balko, “100 to 150 per day.”

What began as a few specialized groups of police trained to address genuine threats to safety has degenerated into small armies descending on organic farms where farmers sell unpasteurized milk and legal medical marijuana dispensaries getting raided as if they were heavily armed threats.

Few freedoms are more basic than being able to sleep securely in your bed without armored men bursting through your door

The increase began under Nixon-era politicians who wanted to look “tough on crime,” even if that meant exaggerating the threat posed by illegal drugs. As the futile war on drugs escalated, cops worried that drug users would destroy evidence if cops knocked and announced themselves. So they stopped doing that, changing a centuries-old rule that treated citizens’ homes as their castles -- castles whose owners must be presented with a warrant before police can enter.

Soon, every police department wanted a SWAT team -- and many were more interested in getting cool military gear than in considering the potential downside -- like terrorizing innocent people, raiding the wrong house and causing violence.

“I found over 50 cases where a completely innocent person was killed in one of these raids,” says Balko. Often this happens because the homeowner does not realize who is breaking down his door in the middle of the night.

Iraq War veteran Jose Guerena just knew that armed men were bursting in. So he picked up his semi-automatic rifle. Before he could take the safety off, police fired 71 bullets, hitting him 22 times.

Police raided his house because they suspected drugs were there. But after Guerena was killed, police found no drugs and no evidence of drug dealing. Today, the vast majority of SWAT raids are about drugs, not terrorism or hostage situations. Guerena’s brother was arrested on drug charges. Balko says, “It appears Guerena’s crime was being related to someone.”

Now that the public is finally starting to have doubts about the drug war, another type of war has arrived: the War on Terror. The idea that domestic enemies need to be raided and rooted out -- that law enforcement should be given a free hand or we could all be killed -- got a new lease on life.

And a new source of funding.

Despite laws clearly saying that soldiers may not be used for domestic policing except in very special circumstances, the Pentagon and the Department of Homeland Security now offer armored vehicles -- tanks and troop transports, body armor and stun grenades -- to police departments, large or small.

Local police jumped at the chance to have new toys -- so they expanded the circumstances under which those toys get used.

A sheriff in quiet Concord, N.H., cites people not so different from me as an excuse for getting DHS money to buy an armored vehicle. In an application for what is essentially a tank, he wrote that groups like the Free State Project -- libertarians who moved to New Hampshire seeking increased individual freedom -- pose “daily challenges” to the police of Concord.

Free Staters better watch out next time they get into an argument over a traffic ticket.

Most libertarians argue that police, courts and military are legitimate functions of government. We focus our skepticism on completely illegitimate government actions, like corporate welfare.

But few freedoms are more basic than being able to sleep securely in your bed without armored men bursting through your door.





headline: The media’s favorite sport: Clinton bashing
byline: By Lanny Davis


Not everyone is as apparently obsessed with writing vitriol about the Clintons as Maureen Dowd, the Times' Op-Ed columnist.For example, last Saturday, Dowd compared the Clintons to the self-destructive cartoon character, Wile E. Coyote.

Dowd's first example of "little explosions" for which she holds the Clintons responsible -- I am not making this up – is the tragic and painful experience of Huma Abedin, due to the conduct of her husband, NYC mayoral candidate, Anthony Weiner, whom she loves and forgives. Go figure.

At least it can be said that Dowd writes opinion on the Op-Ed page of the Times.But that cannot be said about the two news reporters, Nicholas Confessore and Amy Chozick,who wrote a 2,839-word front-page article on Sunday, August 13, with the headline that there was "unease" and “multi-year deficits” at the Clinton Foundation. Those reporters are supposed to write confirmed facts to support their headline and core conclusions. They did not.

Are we all going to go through this all over again -- in a reprised 1990s nightmare?

The first fact asserted by the reporters to explain the "unease" and "concerns" at the foundation was that during 2007 and 2008, the foundation "piled up a $40 million deficit" and in 2012, "it ran more than $8 million in the red."But, as President Clinton pointed out in a published rebuttal,the $40 million assertion is based on IRS Form 990s, which requires multi-year commitments to be reported in the year the commitment is made, not the year the cash actually is received.Thus, he wrote, in 2005 and 2006, as a result of multi-year commitments, the Foundation reported a surplus of $102,800,000, though it collected nowhere near that.“In later years, as that money came in to cover our budgets, we were required to report the spending, but not the cash inflow."In other words, the 990 can report a paper deficit for a particular year when, in fact, there is substantial cash in the bank or soon to be deposited.Thus, the reporters misled readers by relying on the numbers in the paper 990s without further explanation of the actual cash realities.

Moreover, Bill Clinton stated that for 2012, the reported deficit of $8 million was "inaccurate" -- sinceit was "based on unaudited numbers included in our 2012 annual report.When the audited financials are released, they will show a surplus."

The second core accusation in the Times story is that of "potential conflicts" of interest, represented by Teneo, a corporate consulting/public affairs/public relations firm co-founded by long-time senior aide, friend, and Clinton Foundation leader, Doug Band, and to which Clinton was a paid consultant for a brief period of time.

But then one cannot find a single instance of an actual conflict of interest, which is commonly defined as taking positions adverse to one another or having conflicting loyalties.But the factual examples reported in the Times article demonstrate exactly the opposite: Teneo clients were successfully solicited by Band and his colleagues to contribute money to the foundation, which the Times reports has been used in the hundreds of millions of dollars to help the world's poor, hungry, AIDS victims and to avoid global warming.

One of the best political reporters in Washington, Politico's Maggie Haberman, posted an Op-Ed piece August 20, with the unfortunate headline, "Clinton dramas: Here we go again."In fact, the more accurate headline should have been, "Bogus media-created Clinton scandals: Here we go again."

Remember Whitewater? A 20-year-old real estate deal on which the Clintons lost about $40,000, which led to the appointment of Kenneth Starr as independent counsel? Between 1993 and 2001, according to Google, the NewYork Times mentioned Whitewater 2,290 times, while the Washington Post mentioned it 3,175 times. I would estimate tens of thousands of column inches in both papers and thousands of headlines, all implying wrongdoing by the Clintons regarding Whitewater.

The final result:On September 20, 2000, after seven years and more than $50 million of public funds spent by the Office of Independent Counsel, the then-independent counsel, Robert W. Ray, Starr's successor announced that the Whitewater investigation had closed without bringing any charges of wrongdoing against Bill or Hillary Clinton involving their Whitewater investment.

Are we all going to go through this all over again -- in a reprised 1990s nightmare,when even great journalistic institutions such as the New York Times allow themselves to rely on anonymous sourcing and more innuendo than confirmed facts to go after the Clintons?

My gut tells me, just as in the 1990s a majority of the American people will see through this type of journalism, and won't allow compulsive Clinton haters and innuendo journalism to change their favorable opinions of Bill and Hillary Clinton.





headline: Army can’t ignore mental illness when considering Bradley Manning’s crimes
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Revelations at the trial and subsequent sentencing hearing for Private Bradley Manning prove that the Army is ignoring mental illness in its ranks and ruining countless people’s lives.

Prior to leaking secret government information to WikiLeaks Private Bradley Manning was reportedly showing all the signs of severe mental distress, and the Army seemingly did nothing about it.

Manning wasn’t just a little anxious or depressed.

He flew into rages.

He lapsed into catatonic states in the middle of discussions.

The U.S. military has apparently learned almost nothing from the skyrocketing rates of PTSD and major depression in those returning from Iraq and Afghanistan. 

He had sent an email to a superior of himself in a blond wig and makeup and stated he was suffering with a gender identity disorder which he had been trying to overcome. He wrote that his enlisting in the Army had been a strategy to avoid his symptoms, but that it hadn’t worked.

A month later he was found curled in a fetal position in a storeroom with a knife at his feet.

Yet, Manning was kept in a war zone by Master Sgt. Paul Adkins and not relieved of his responsibilities or clearance to handle classified material.

Adkins said his unit was understaffed and that Manning was saving lives by analyzing intelligence about threats in the war zone.

Res ipsa loquitur. That’s Latin for, “The thing speaks for itself,” a common law standard that asserts that negligence can sometimes be obvious from the events that then unfold.

If the Army has nothing more to say about any serious attempts it made to address Private Manning’s psychiatric symptoms, then it—and not Manning—is responsible for classified information being leaked (even though Manning accepts responsibility, by the way).

Because then the Army would be negligent in not removing from a war zone a person so fragmented psychologically as to sometimes lose the ability or willingness to speak, to be confused as to whether he was a male or not, and to be found curled up like a baby, with a knife at his feet.

The Army, the U.S. government and We the People, would then have gotten what we deserved and could have reasonably been expected—the recruitment into intrigue of an obviously psychiatrically compromised person.

The Armed Forces have apparently learned almost nothing from the skyrocketing rates of PTSD and major depression in those returning from Iraq and Afghanistan.

They have apparently learned nothing from the epidemic of suicide in their ranks. They have not learned that their strategy of attempting to promote “psychological resiliency” in soldiers by having them not focus on their emotions and ignore their traumatic experiences is a bankrupt one that is gutting the mental well-being of enlisted people and boomeranging back on them, veterans and the rest of us.

I have written again and again and again about the fact that ignoring our shattered, sorry excuse for a mental health care system in America (and we can certainly include the Armed Forces of America, because it is even worse therein) is the chief factor responsible for mass killings in our communities and for all manner of crime on our streets and, yes, even for acts like those of Private Manning.

Guns aren’t the problem that took dozens of lives in Aurora, Colorado and Newtown, Connecticut and Casas Adobes, Arizona (where Representative Gabrielle Giffords was shot in the head and others killed). Untreated mental illness is.

And evil and hatred of our country wasn’t the problem in Iraq when Private Manning leaked hundreds of thousands of documents to WikiLeaks. Mental illness was.

And, by the way, it just so happens that the U.S. military won’t deploy into combat those who enlist in the service on psychiatric medications—even ones like Prozac or Viibryd designed to treat depression and keep it away, sometimes forever. Therefore, lots of folks who want to serve their country stop taking their medicines, in order to enlist.

What policy could be more prejudicial toward those who actually want help for their symptoms? Or, more simply put: What policy could be more stupid?

I’m a forensic psychiatrist, but it doesn’t take a forensic psychiatrist to get to the bottom of this one. Simply as an American citizen, I would like to apologize to Private Manning and his family for the harm done him and done to them by the United States Army.





headline: The speech, the Dream and me
byline: By Cal Thomas


It was an atypical August summer day in Washington, D.C., 50 years ago next week. Temperatures were in the low 80s, about 10 degrees cooler than normal. Skies were partly cloudy. Most government officials were vacationing.

I was a young copyboy at the NBC News Washington bureau. Correspondent Jack Perkins asked me to accompany him to hear a speech by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. at the Lincoln Memorial.

What I knew about African-Americans ("negroes" they were called then when people wanted to be polite; much worse when they did not) was limited to my experience with two maids employed by my parents during my childhood and years playing college basketball.

I knew our maids only by their first names, a vestige of slavery when blacks were viewed as less valuable than white people and denied even the dignity of their surnames. Basketball exposed me to people I might not otherwise have met growing up in an all-white suburban Washington, D.C., neighborhood. Basketball and socializing with my African-American teammates began to teach me about race, class and discrimination.

Then came that August day. Never before and not since have I heard or seen a person with such rhetorical power, conviction and authority. For those who were not alive at that time, it is important to remember the enormous pressures facing Dr. King, his family and associates. Many voices rejected Dr. King's nonviolent strategy. They believed such a tactic delayed and thus denied justice. Stokely Carmichael, H. Rap Brown, Eldridge Cleaver, Bobby Seale and his Black Panther Party and others preferred confrontation, including violence.

King thought it more effective to appeal to the better angels of whites. He saw goodness -- or at least its potential -- even in those who called him a communist and much worse.

Observing that sea of humanity stretching down the Reflecting Pool was the beginning of a turning point in my own view of civil rights. King appealed to religious themes at a time when much of America still responded to such ideals and even when some, especially Southern churches and Southern Democrats, used scripture to justify segregation.

The civil rights movement seems cool in retrospect, but it was dangerous for many and deadly for some. Friends of mine were beaten and jailed for marching for the rights of African Americans -- and not only in the South. Journalists were attacked.

This month, Turner Class Movies has been running the documentary "King: A Filmed Record ... from Montgomery to Memphis." While it has long been available, first on VHS and now DVD and excerpts have been televised over the years, the broadcast of the entire documentary is magnetic. Mostly without narration, the film is allowed to speak for itself and speak it does ... loudly and powerfully.

One sees contorted faces and hears un-bleeped profanities hurled at black marchers. "Go back to Africa!" is one of the few slurs that can be printed in a family newspaper. The scenes are gut-wrenching, embarrassing.

Mine was not the only life touched by Dr. King's "I Have a Dream" speech. It is rightly called one of the greatest orations of all time. For those who were there, this is not an overstatement.

One wonders what Dr. King might think of racial progress today. Yes, there have been great advances in civil rights, but fewer advances in strong black families and economic empowerment. Dr. King's sacrifice opened the door to progress for African-Americans. Perhaps he would say many who are mired in poverty need to go back and retrieve something they seem to have lost, including personal responsibility, accountability and, yes, even faith about which Dr. King often spoke as he salted his speeches with spiritual truths.

Such as this one: "I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plain, and the crooked places will be made straight, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together."





Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Is Muslim Brotherhood working together with Amb. Chris Stevens’ assassin?
byline: By Cynthia Farahat


Ahmed Moussa, a prominent Egyptian television personality on the Tahrir TV channel as well as a former officer in Egyptian State Security Intelligence (SSI), went public on July 30 with a remarkable piece of information.

Moussa said, addressing U.S. ambassador Anne Patterson (in absentia) on his show:

Ambassador Stevens was killed in Benghazi, and you know who killed him, the U.S. administration knows who killed him, and you know how he was killed and it was a major strike against the U.S. administration, and all of you.

The assassin is now present at Rabia Al-Adawiya [mosque protest] His name is, do you know it or you would like me to inform you? He’s affiliated with Al Qaeda in Libya, his name is Mohsen Al-Azazi, his passport was found in the house of Khairat El-Shater.

That killer is in Rabia Al-Adawiya now, with Safwat Hegazy and Mohammed El-Beltagy, whom you and your administration support and aid. Your administration aids terrorism.

In the course of this statement, Moussa announced three facts:

1. Ambassador Chris Stevens' assassin in Benghazi on Sept. 11, 2012, is named Mohsen Al-Azazi.

2. Azizi associates with Mohammed El-Beltagy, the general secretary of the Muslim Brotherhood’s Freedom and Justice Party (FJP) and with Safwat Hegazy, a leading MB cleric.

3. The police found Azizi’s passport in the house of leading MB strategist Khairat El-Shater, presumbably when Shater was arrested on July 5.

If true, this is sensational news, for it directly ties the MB to anti-American terrorism and repudiates the Obama administration policy of trying to work with the MB. It also further confirms that the MB is a terrorist organization.

It might explain why the Obama administration is mediating in talks with Egypt’s interim government for a “reconciliation process” that would permit a safe exist for Morsi and other MB leaders outside Egypt without a trial that likely would disclose more embarrassing details about Benghazi.

But is the news that Moussa announced true? Several indications point to its veracity.

First, Moussa is a well-regarded source who often interviews intelligence agents and high-ranking military personnel on his show and is renowned for breaking intelligence-related news.

In March, for example, he broke the news that Egyptian intelligence stopped sending Mohammed Morsi written briefings and limited its reports to verbal communication, a reflection of its fear that his affiliation to an international Islamist organization (with over seventy branches worldwide) would compromise the information. As well as revealing some of the details of the meeting that took place on 30 July between Morsi and Catherine Ashton, British Labour politician and diplomat.

Second, as I reported in March, in a video shot during the terrorist attack on the U.S. mission in Benghazi, Egyptian jihadists approaching the U.S. installations said in Egyptian colloquial Arabic, “Don’t shoot, Dr. Morsi sent us.”

Moussa further went on to say, still addressing Patterson on this TV show:

Ask the Muslim Brotherhood to hand Azizi to U.S. authorities. -- And of course they will not, as he is there to wage terrorist attacks against Egyptian citizens, as he hides there in the protection in Rabia, among killers with massive amounts of weapons ... Why doesn’t the MB, which you often praise, hand him to you?

That question has yet to be answered by either Amb. Patterson, President Obama or the U.S. government.





headline: Congress must help America's drivers and ditch Renewable Fuel Standard
byline: By Thomas J. Pyle


Only in Washington can an expensive, unnecessary regulation be considered common sense.

The Obama administration is digging in its heels when it comes to repealing harmful energy regulations that increase consumer costs with little benefit to the environment.

The Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) is a classic example of hugely misguided energy policy, but to the Obama administration and its environmentalist allies, the RFS is a beneficial regulation aimed at curbing emissions and safeguarding against climate change.

The Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) is a classic example of hugely misguided energy policy.

What they don’t say, but mean, is that it artificially drives up the cost of gasoline and when that happens, people can’t afford to drive as much. Remember how energy prices need to “skyrocket?”

Well, they are.

“The backbone of our policy is the Renewable Fuel Standard,” said top Obama energy adviser Heather Zichal at an event last week, adding that “calls to repeal the standard are nothing but shortsighted.”

Lest there be any doubters in the room, Zichal went on to add that the White House is confident the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) can oversee the law and any subsequent market challenges.

Perhaps, however, Zichal and other RFS-proponents are the shortsighted ones.

When the RFS was enacted under the Bush administration, it hinged on the assumption that gasoline demand would rise year after year. If Americans were using more gasoline, the thinking went, blending fuel with more and more ethanol would be a fairly painless exercise: ethanol content would rise right along with consumption.

Yet policymakers never factored in a downturn in the economy and declining demand for transportation fuels that began in 2007 and continues today.

The RFS, however, abides as the law of the land, leaving Americans stuck with an adverse policy that Washington is unwilling to correct.

Unfortunately, the consequences of inaction are hitting the economy hard. For starters, refiners are up against what’s known as the “blend wall” – the point at which mandated ethanol levels exceed the amount companies are willing to use or sell to consumers.

So far, refiners have been able to comply with the RFS because the ethanol mandate – 13.2 billion gallons in 2012 – has been equal to or less than 10 percent of total gasoline consumption in the U.S.

But that’s about to change.

In order to keep up with the rising RFS mandate, the EPA has approved a new fuel blend with a higher ethanol content known as E15.

Yet refiners are reluctant to use E15, mainly because automakers have said the blend can corrode older and smaller engines. Many car companies, including Toyota, Nissan and BMW, have said car damage due to “improper fueling” voids any warranties. That’s not much of an incentive for refiners to try to sell E15 to customers.

Perhaps the the worst consequence of the RFS is the skyrocketing price of Renewable Identification Numbers (RINs), which are credits that refiners must purchase in exchange for not blending ethanol into gasoline. As with any good in limited supply that is in high demand, the prices of RIN’s are soaring.

Earlier this month they reached record highs, and currently remain near $1.40. In January 2013, prices were below 10 cents a RIN. A 1400% price increase in six months is something only the government can do.

These increased costs are being passed on to consumers.

Last week, the average cost of a gallon of regular gas was $3.64. That marked a 15-cent rise over the previous week, and 24 cents more than the average one year earlier.

Anyone claiming higher RIN prices have nothing to do with rising gas prices is either blind or fooling themselves. Moreover, corn prices are also rising due to crops being diverted from food supplies to ethanol production.

The RFS is a perfect example of a short-sighted government policy gone wrong. Its advocates can’t see beyond their intransigent commitment to the biofuels industry, which is fattening with each passing day thanks to soaring profits. Unfortunately, not everybody is reaping the benefits.

In the case of the RFS, E15 is putting American drivers in danger, while rising RIN prices are pushing up the prices of gas and food.

Congress has the opportunity to act, and work to fix a bipartisan mistake with a bipartisan solution. Indeed, it’s time to put pressure on the EPA to acknowledge the fatal flaw of the RFS – Americans are using less gasoline – and reverse course.

Recently, two different House committees held hearings on the impacts of the RFS. That the RFS is unworkable is a no-brainer. It remains to be seen if Congress or the EPA will come to their senses and help American motorists who are feeling the squeeze.





headline: Inside the mind of convicted crime boss Whitey Bulger
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


According to Whitey Bulger's attorney, Mr. Bulger, now convicted of 11 murders, had no illusions that he would escape--at minimum--life in prison and knew full well that his legal odyssey might, ultimately, end in his execution. 

He had only one goal for the court proceedings against him: He wanted it made clear that he had never been a government informant. 

He had never flipped. 

He had been a stand-up guy, to the end. 

While not every bullied or abused or powerless child grows up to be Whitey Bulger, one did.

If you want to understand Whitey Bulger understand this: Early life experiences--of which we know too little, but which had to be harrowing and disempowering--created in him a need for absolute power over, and absolute devotion from, those around him. Either you were with him 100 percent or you were against him, and better off dead.

It may seem like a stretch to think that Whitey Bulger could have been forged from having no control over alcoholism in his home of origin, or relentless bullying or sexual abuse from a relative or member of the clergy, or capricious and brutal discipline by a parent, but it is true. And while not every bullied or abused or powerless child grows up to be Whitey Bulger, one did. 

And others grew up to be his henchmen. 

And others grow up to be gang members who have no empathy for rival gang members. And others grow up to be drug dealers, who have no empathy for their customers. 

And others grow up to be ruthless, cutthroat businesspeople who have a predatory eye for opportunity born of the weakness of adversaries and would profit from their shortcomings, without second thoughts or pangs of guilt.

The "us" versus "them" world of Whitey Bulger, the hardened shell of a man who, when threatened with execution, wants only to make it known that he never cracked, is about what happens to people when they grow calluses around their souls, initially only to protect themselves, which is the very human story inside this seemingly (but not) inhuman man.

It is not going too far to say that the raw material of someone who grows up to be as grotesquely insensitive as Whitey Bulger has to be someone so exquisitely sensitive as a young person that he built a fortress with seemingly impenetrable walls around him. 

Like many people who build such fortresses in life, his has now, at age 83, finally become a prison. 

It can be a long, long time in coming, but the truth always, always wins.





headline: Spy chief Clapper to run 'independent' review of US spy program
byline: By Eric Boehm


Less than three days after President Obama announced an “independent review” of the nation’s surveillance technologies, the White House has appointed James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, to run the panel.

Let that sink in.

In an announcement posted online Monday afternoon, Clapper’s office said he would run the president’s Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies.

“The Review Group will assess whether, in light of advancements in communications technologies, the United States employs its technical collection capabilities in a manner that optimally protects our national security and advances our foreign policy while appropriately accounting for other policy considerations, such as the risk of unauthorized disclosure and our need to maintain the public trust,” Clapper wrote.

He’s a funny guy to be talking about the need to maintain the public trust.

In March, Clapper was at a congressional hearing where he was asked point blank by U.S. Sen. Ron Wyden, (D-Ore.), about whether the National Security Agency collects “any type of data at all on millions or hundreds of millions of Americans.”

“No, sir,” said Clapper.

That statement now appears to be untrue.

To continue reading Eric Boehm's story on Watchdog.org, click here.





headline: UNESCO decision to honor Che Guevara proves it doesn't deserve US support
byline: By Brett D. Schaefer


He’s long adorned the T-shirts of clueless campus liberals. Now he’s been feted by UNESCO.

Last month, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization -- in an appalling act -- listed the “Life and Works of Ernesto Che Guevara: from the originals manuscripts of its adolescence and youth to the campaign Diary in Bolivia” among the valued contributions of mankind meriting inclusion in its Memory of the World Programme, along with other rare and unique records and works of art.

Cuba and Bolivia jointly nominated the life and works of Guevara for consideration by the program’s International Advisory Committee (IAC) on the basis that his “contribution to revolutionary action and theory, as seen in his theoretical works, in his essays, as well as in his articles and speeches, is of extraordinary worth due to its depth and scope.”

Despite an inexplicable celebrity appeal among the leftists and the ignorant, Guevara was a thug.

The inventory of documents will include 431 manuscripts by Guevara and 567 documents about or related to him, including “valuable iconographic material by and about Che, films, letters and museum pieces.”

What won’t be included is a full listing and account of the people whose lives he destroyed.

Despite an inexplicable celebrity appeal among the leftists and the ignorant, Guevara was a thug responsible for the murder, torture, and labor camp imprisonment of thousands of dissidents, artists, homosexuals and other undesirables in Cuba. That the IAC and UNESCO thought it appropriate to honor a life’s work of atrocities among the historical records, art, and other achievements of mankind demonstrates an inexcusable lack of perspective.

To its credit, the U.S. formally objected to the decision to honor Guevara:

The United States Government objects to the decision of the Memory of the World International Advisory Committee to recommend the writings of Che Guevara for inscription in UNESCO’s Memory of the World Register. Che Guevara is a controversial figure who advocated violence and made no apologies for executing people in the pursuit of revolution. The content of his writings is not in keeping with UNESCO and United Nations values. UNESCO’s Memory of the World program must not be used as a tool to glorify or legitimize violence.

Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (R-Fla.) also condemned the decision as “more than an insult to the families of those Cubans who were lined up and summarily executed by Che and his merciless cronies but it also serves as a direct contradiction to the UNESCO ideals of encouraging peace and universal respect for human rights.”

Unfortunately, this was not UNESCO’s first misstep, but only the most recent:

These troubling actions are at odds with UNESCO’s claims to be a voice of moderation, ethical standards, and human rights.

Most troubling, however, was the 2011 decision to grant full UNESCO membership to the Palestinians over U.S. objections. This decision triggered an immediate freeze on all U.S. funding to the agency in accordance with a U.S. law adopted in the early 1990s.

Despite UNESCO’s marginal utility, questionable judgment, and poor performance, the Obama administration has tried since 2011 to convince Congress to change the law to permit resumed funding for UNESCO because once the U.S. is two years in arrears, America will likely lose its vote UNESCO’s General Conference.

President Obama’s FY 2014 budget states the administration’s desire to amend the law and requests funding for FY 2014 and to reimburse UNESCO for funds withheld in previous years –a total of $233 million.

When pressed on why the U.S. should change the law to allow payments to UNESCO, the administration often responds that we need to be present and paid in full in order to stop the organization from doing things we don’t like. During her confirmation hearing, Samantha Power reiterated this point:

The one caution is that when we are out of U.N. agencies, which would be the consequence ultimately of de-funding U.N. agencies, we can’t stand up for Israel, we can’t stand up for American values, we’re not there leading on a range of other U.S. interests. And so I just think we have to find the right balance.

This claim is belied by recent history. The U.S. is has been a voting member of UNESCO and been on UNESCO’s Executive Board while the organization has repeatedly acted over U.S. objections. Also consider that UNESCO has done these things while it is desperate to convince Congress to restore U.S. funding.

If this is UNESCO at its most cooperative, imagine how minimal U.S. influence will be if the Obama administration succeeds in changing the law to allow continued funding? A liberated UNESCO, unfettered by the need to try and placate Congress, would be even less pliant to U.S. concerns.

The bottom line is that UNESCO is not critical to U.S. interests, as President Reagan recognized when he decided in 1984 to withdraw from UNESCO because of its poor management and hostility to the “basic institutions of a free society.”

The U.S. rejoined UNESCO in 2003 in recognition of management reforms, not because of any perceived damage to U.S. interests from America’s absence. The decision to honor Che Guevara only underscores that UNESCO is undeserving of U.S. membership and support.





headline: It's no mystery why most Alaskans in Bristol Bay oppose the Pebble mine
byline: By Joel Reynolds


It’s a sure sign of desperation when the CEO of the consortium of foreign mining companies that want to build one of the largest open pit mines in North America claims to be defending the National Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”) from “attack.” 

According to the Pebble Partnership’s John Shively, environmental groups and “politically motivated groups” are running a “campaign to subvert and evade NEPA” by mobilizing in support of EPA’s review of the proposed Pebble Mine – a reckless scheme to build a massive open pit mine in the headwaters of the world’s greatest wild salmon fishery in Bristol Bay, Alaska. 

With friends like John Shively, NEPA doesn’t need enemies. In fact, by arguing he has a right to NEPA review before his project can be rejected, he turns NEPA on its head.



First, NEPA has been and remains a critically important environmental statute – a federal commitment to environmental quality that, according to President Obama, is the “cornerstone of our nation’s modern environmental protections.” 

It was enacted in 1969 precisely to ensure that projects like the one pursued by Shively cannot be approved without environmental review. 

NEPA provides no support for his self-serving view that a NEPA process is required before his massive mining project can be rejected by EPA or any other federal agency with lawful jurisdiction. 

NEPA was never intended to burden EPA actions necessary to prevent large-scale mining from contaminating a resource like the incomparable Bristol Bay wild salmon fishery. 

NEPA was never intended to burden federal action to protect our natural resources from degradation and destruction.

Second, NEPA is not our only environmental statute, and EPA unquestionably has jurisdiction to act under a wide range of others, including the federal Clean Water Act. 

Of particular concern to Shively and his Pebble Mine project, section 404(c) of the Clean Water Act explicitly authorizes EPA to prohibit or restrict a proposed activity where it is likely to cause “unacceptable adverse effects” on local fisheries, waters, wildlife, and recreational resources. 

Here, the EPA’s own multi-year, comprehensive scientific risk assessment has documented that adverse effects – even catastrophic effects -- are foreseeable if large-scale mining is allowed in the sensitive, hydrologically-complex watershed that feeds Bristol Bay. 

There is nothing in NEPA that is even arguably inconsistent with this Clean Water Act authority.

To be sure, EPA has rarely used section 404(c). Indeed, in the 40-year history of the Clean Water Act, the agency has taken action based on it only a dozen times. EPA has viewed it as extraordinary -- applicable only in the most compelling circumstances, where the risk of harm is significant and beyond reasonable doubt. And there is every reason to expect the agency to apply a similarly strict standard today. 

Shively’s histrionic claim that “tens of thousands of other projects” will be put at risk by EPA action on Pebble Mine is, once again, self-serving fiction.

If there is a clearer case than this one for use of the agency’s authority to protect the resources enumerated by Congress – including, most particularly, local fisheries – it has never been presented. 

The sheer size of the proposed Pebble Mine (and the long line of mining claims waiting behind it), and the undeniable importance of the resources at risk if mining is allowed, put this request in a class by itself. 

The interests of no one – not even the mining companies’ economic interest in regulatory certainty -- will be served by allowing this threat to hang over the region and its people for decades.

It’s no mystery why more than 80 percent of the people who live in the Bristol Bay region oppose the Pebble Mine. EPA action to protect Bristol Bay and all of the communities that depend on it is needed now.

With all due respect to Mr. Shively, NEPA is doing just fine without his help. 





headline: Gun toting teachers' names must remain private
byline: By John Lott


Are people safer if criminals know who is carrying concealed handguns? Arkansas Attorney General Dustin McDaniel seems to think so.

With school starting soon, he claims that if the Clarksville, Arkansas School District lets employees carry concealed handguns at school, their names must be made public. This is his second attempt to derail the school district’s proposal.

McDaniel’s demand to publicize the names will greatly limit the protection these employees can offer.

School shooters have a strategic advantage in that they determine when and where to attack.

The alternative of hiring uniformed armed guards is not only costly, with one armed guard costing more than the cost of training and equipping over 20 employees, but also relatively ineffective as they are usually the first victims shot (e.g., see here and here).

The benefit of letting some unknown teachers, staff and administrators carry concealed handgun is that the killers don't know who to attack first.

The benefit of letting some unknown teachers, staff and administrators carry concealed handgun is that the killers don't know who to attack first. Publicizing their names might intimidate employees and lead them to decide not to participate in the program.

McDaniel has already gone to some tortured extremes in fighting against the Clarksville School District's plan. As the state's attorney general, he is often asked to interpret the state's laws. In this case, he claims that while private businesses can hire armed guards, a public entity such as a school district doesn't have the same power.

However debatable that is, there are other parts of the law that clearly deal with government entities. For example, local government entities, such as school districts, can deputize individuals.

The issue is similar to what happened last year with the Journal News, a newspaper in New York State. The paper garnered national attention when it published the names of people with gun permits.

The issue isn't just about privacy, as McDaniel wants to argue, it is also a safety issue.

By revealing the names of permit holders, the newspaper effectively told criminals what homes had no armed defense. Indeed, when editors of the paper were asked by documentary filmaker and activist James O'Keefe if they would put signs in front of their homes saying that they were "gun free," they understood it would make them targets of criminals.

In order to prevent similar problems earlier this year, Arkansas passed a law banning the release of the names and zip codes of permit holders.

McDaniel argues: "Given the unusual duties and responsibilities the school district intended to assign to the [Emergency Response Team] members, I must conclude that knowing the number of [Emergency Response Teams] members and their identities would shed great light on the school district's performance of its duties. In my opinion, though the privacy interest is weighty, the public's interest is at least as weighty, which means that the record must be disclosed."

But the program is easy to evaluate without making the names public. If guns are ever misused, that would surely instantly get media attention.

Indeed, the idea in Clarksville, Arkansas is hardly new. Before the 1995 Gun Free School Zone Act, most states allowing concealed carry let permit holders carry guns in schools. In four states, they still can. Some school districts in other states, such as Ohio and Texas, do the same. No problems have ever been reported.

The Attorney General is also going against the trend in his own state in another way. Arkansas has recently allowed churches to determine themselves whether concealed handgun permit holders will be allowed to bring their guns with them.

Law-abiding citizens, not criminals, obey these bans. Instead of making places safer, disarming law abiding citizens left them sitting ducks.

Attackers go where victims can't defend themselves.

In the Aurora, Colo., movie theater shooting, out of seven theaters showing the "Batman" movie premiere within 20 minutes of the suspect's apartment, only one theater banned permitted concealed handguns.

Suspect James Holmes didn't go to the closest nor the largest movie theater but to the one that banned self-defense.

Time after time the story is the same.

With just two exceptions, every public mass shooting in the United States since at least 1950 has taken place where citizens were banned from carrying guns. Despite strict gun regulations, Europe has had three of the worst four K-12 public school shootings.

Sometimes, permit holders save lives. Joel Merck, an assistant high school principal in Pearl, Miss., used to carry his permitted handgun at school, but stopped after the 1995 act passed. When his school was attacked in October 1997, he ran a mile to get his gun stored off school property, and still stopped the attack 11 minutes before police arrived. Before 1996, he could have stopped it sooner.

Ask yourself: Would you feel safer with a sign on the side of your home declaring that "this house is a gun-free zone"? If you wouldn't put these signs on your home, why put them elsewhere?





headline: Will sanitized version of Al Jazeera aka 'AJAM' win US audience?
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Here’s a triumph of language over truth: Al Jazeera in America has become AJAM.

The initials, popping up in headlines and the network’s Twitter feed, aim to sanitize the image of Usama bin Laden’s favorite mouthpiece. That history makes the brand a hard sell as it launches a US channel.

The antiseptic acronym might work — if Al Jazeera changes its stripes. If it doesn’t, by any name, it will remain unwelcome and unwatched.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column on other topics, including Common Core and New York City's school in the New York Post, click here.





headline: It's Obama, McCain, Graham who made 'huge mistake' in Egypt
byline: By Raymond Stock


On their current trip to Cairo, Senators John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), two of President Barack Obama’s most persistent critics on everything in foreign policy from Syria to Benghazi, have found common cause with him at last.

All three fear that the anti-American (and generally anti-human) Muslim Brotherhood (MB), whom they mistakenly see as “moderate,” will disappear from the halls of power in Egypt, our most important Arab ally. They also evidently worry that the MB’s leading figures, such as now-deposed (and arrested) President Mohamed Morsi—who had awarded himself powers greater than any previous ruler in Egypt’s history—will not be free to plot a return to power in an ancient nation that he had nearly destroyed in only one year.

Echoing earlier White House warnings, the two senior senators suggested that we may cut off our $1.6 billion in annual (mainly military) aid, the very tie that binds our countries together, as it has for more than thirty preciously peaceful years. Not to comply with their demands, McCain and Graham said August 6, would be—as Graham put it--a “huge mistake.”

With their current stance on Egypt, President Obama, Sens. John McCain and Lindsay Graham are risking one of America’s most crucial alliances.

The White House, McCain and Graham have warned that the aid may be cut if the MB’s leaders are not freed from detention—they have been under arrest since President Mohammed Morsi was overthrown July 3 by the military in response to the historically huge popular demonstrations at the end of June. (Morsi has since been charged for having been part of a 2011 prison break alleged to have been carried out by Hamas.)

They further demand that the MB be brought into the new transitional government of technocrats appointed by the quietly charismatic (and mysteriously Islamist, but apparently independent) strongman minister of defense, General Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi--who had himself been appointed by Morsi. That new government, headed by Adly Mansour (a Supreme Constitutional Court justice) as interim president and respected economist Dr. Hazem Beblawi as prime minister, claims it has reached out to the MB, which refuses to respond to its overtures. Meanwhile, the Islamists are gathered in two major squares in Cairo, waiting for the security forces to clear them away—and for the chance to be martyred when they do.

In response to McCain and Graham's warnings, Mansour denounced what he called “unacceptable interference in internal politics.” In this, even a nation infamous for its political xenophobia can be forgiven for seeing a not-so hidden hand attempting to steer the ship of state.

But by blundering this way, Obama, McCain and Graham are joining the departing U.S. ambassador in Cairo, Anne Patterson—widely mocked (with gross inaccuracy) as a hayzaboon, or old crone, for reportedly hectoring Egyptians not to rise up against the elected government (which had turned itself into an Islamist dictatorship)—on a list of new Ugly Americans. She unfortunately gave this advice shortly before the largest demonstrations ever seen in human memory were directed against her suspected client, Morsi. (Reflecting heightened paranoia, her possible successor, Ambassador Robert Ford—who had previously served in Algeria, Bahrain, Iraq and Syria—is under considerable Twitter fire in Egypt, bizarrely accused of having caused the strife that has recently plagued those countries.)

And by going this route, Obama, McCain and Graham are risking one of America’s most crucial alliances. They would do so for a not-so-beautiful friendship with a far from benign band of brothers that actually wants to conquer and rule the world (not just the Middle East) in a revived Islamic caliphate. (It is the same risk that Obama took when, after brief vacillation, he abruptly dumped our country’s long-term “friend,” Hosni Mubarak, in 2011, knowing that Islamists like the MB would likely be the only force capable of winning many votes in the new “democracy.”)

The Brother’s goals are hardly secret, despite eight decades of adroit, religiously-sanctioned lying, or taqiyya about their intentions. But they were elected, and so, it is said, we ought to support them. Then again, the U.S. cut off aid when Hamas, the MB’s Palestinian branch, won parliamentary elections in 2006--because they refused to renounce terrorism, recognize the State of Israel, and accept agreements that the previous government had signed.

The MB undoubtedly believes that to get what it wants in the short-term—to halt the flow of American cash and equipment to its enemies in the military--is to continue to boycott the bogus “reconciliation” process. (Already, Obama has suspended the scheduled shipment of four F-16s last month, in a move that angered millions of Egyptians.)

If an aid stoppage should last, that could lead to the collapse of the transitional government and Morsi’s reinstatement as president—the MB’s irreducible demand. Hence they have resisted the senators’ calls to dialogue with the new regime. There is no obvious reason for the Brotherhood to change this strategy.

The estimated eight-to-twelve billion dollars quickly coughed up by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to cover emergency imports of diesel fuel and wheat and to rebuild depleted hard-currency reserves are surely crucial for now. But if the military—Egypt’s most prestigious institution and itself a pillar of the economy—should have nowhere else to go, Russia and China are always waiting in the wings, and would love to have a presence on both the Nile and Suez.

Refusing to recognize that popular will can mean more than just elections, America’s “huge mistake” begins. Given that the ratio of MB opponents to supporters is now perhaps seven-to-one, added to the resentment that most Egyptians feel against any effort to tie vital aid to the tyrannical MB, and the wildly-popular al-Sisi’s own fury at the Brotherhood for pushing him (and most Egyptians) into such a place, it is likely Morsi’s side that will fail.

And with it, our own.





headline: ObamaCare's 'navigator' program ripe for disaster
byline: By Gov. Bobby Jindal


We already know ObamaCare is a poorly conceived law that is unworkable in the real world. We know the law is already driving health care premiums through the roof contrary to what President Obama promised. For instance, in my home state, our largest health insurance provider reported recently that health care premiums could go up by more than 200 percent on some customers, and the average increase could be almost 30 percent according to one study.

We also know that implementation of the law has been a disaster so far. The Obama administration made the decision last month to delay the penalty provisions in the bill on employers for another year. So the boss gets spared, but no such luck for the working stiff.

This action is an acknowledgement from the administration that the law is not ready for primetime. Worse, the delay is going to increase the cost of the already too expensive bill by $12 billion. And there are clearly political motivations behind the delay as moving the tax on employers beyond the 2014 elections removes a burden on Democrats running to defend this terrible piece of legislation.

ObamaCare is just not ready for primetime, and there is something more than a little odd about using taxpayer money for a marketing campaign aimed at taxpayers

The writing is already on the wall -- the entire ObamaCare law needs to be repealed.

But wait, as they say in the infomercials, there’s more! By August 15, the Obama administration is expected to spend $54 million of our tax dollars to hire community organizers to push this law on the American people. The president was once a self-professed community organizer, so perhaps this is his way of “giving back” as they say.

Here is how it is supposed to work.

Over the next few weeks, the Obama administration is set to dole out grants and begin to hire thousands of marketers to help sell ObamaCare. The Obama administration came up with a clever name for these marketers – ‘navigators’ – who are charged with helping to sign people up for ObamaCare.

‘Navigator’ is a crafty name, but in reality, there are very few restrictions on who they are, and what exactly they are supposed to be doing. ‘Navigators’ are supposed to be hired to help consumers understand the law and the insurance coverage provisions in the new health exchanges. Sounds like a job for a rocket scientist.

The ‘navigators’ are prohibited from having financial ties to an insurance company, but other than that there are few constraints. Union organizers and community activists are among the types that are allowed to be hired as ‘navigators’, and having prior experience working in the health care field doesn’t seem to necessarily be a pre-requisite for the job. I wonder what percentage of these ‘navigators’ will be partisan Democrats?

The ‘navigators’ will be required to take only 20 hours of online course training, which will apparently make them experts on the 1,000 page ObamaCare bill. An HHS official was even quoted this week saying, “We view training as an ongoing process.” Count me as skeptical.

To make matters worse, these ‘navigators’ are going to have access to all kinds of personal information that will make the whole program ripe for fraud.

When helping individuals sign up for ObamaCare, these community organizers will have access to sensitive personal information, including social security numbers and tax information.

Amazingly, HHS is not planning on requiring background checks on these individuals before putting them to work. Besides the obvious identity theft concerns, this is a frightening development in light of the political activities and invasion of privacy, which the IRS and others have engaged in during the Obama presidency.

But the biggest problem with the ‘navigator’ program is it appears the federal government still doesn’t have the complete means to verify if an individual is even eligible for exchange insurance subsidies.

Coupled with the delay of the employer mandate, there is little way to know if a person has access to affordable insurance through their employer, making them ineligible for subsidies. This makes the system open for fraud and abuse. ObamaCare is now on the honor system.

Beyond the serious implications for taxpayers that thousands could be signing up to receive taxpayer subsidies who are not eligible, this is problematic for consumers who could be forced to pay back money if they mistakenly sign up for ObamaCare, along with the potential for fines.

You could not make this stuff up. No one would believe it. I’m not sure I believe it.

In Louisiana, I signed a law to ensure that felons and ex-cons are not the ones who will be in charge of the ‘navigator’ program and have access to all this sensitive personal data. This is a step in the right direction and some other states have passed similar legislation, but running the ‘navigator’ program without a proven means to verify if a person is eligible for ObamaCare has the potential for disaster.

Like he did with the delay of the employer mandate, the president needs to halt these lucrative grants to the ‘navigator’ program immediately.

ObamaCare is just not ready for primetime, and there is something more than a little odd about using taxpayer money for a marketing campaign aimed at taxpayers. The troubling details of the navigator program provide just another example of the poor planning and implementation of ObamaCare and shows why the law must be repealed.





headline: Now the bad news -- Amazon's Bezos vows Washington Post won’t change 'values'
byline: By Dan Gainor


Paleontologists say the Age of Dinosaurs ended with the Cretaceous Period. Mark Aug. 5, 2013, on your calendar as the beginning of the end for modern dinosaurs. That’s the day that new media consumed old media, as Amazon.com founder Jeff Bezos bought up one of the most dominant old media names – The Washington Post – for just $250 million. That’s less than one-third the value of the Oakland Raiders football team, and that’s only the 50th most valuable sports team according to Forbes.

Unlike most journalists, Bezos understands profit. He ranks No. 19 on the Forbes Billionaires List with $25.2 billion.

He’s buying a newspaper that “has suffered a 44percent decline in operating revenue over the past six years,” according to the paper’s own story/obit.

Apparently, the paper must have been on his Amazon shopping list. Edgy considering Bezos also has said: “Printed papers won’t be normal in twenty years.” Then again, has the Post ever been “normal?”

Mark Aug. 5, 2013, on your calendar as the beginning of the end for modern dinosaurs. It's the day that new media consumed old media.

The sale followed a similar sale of the Boston Globe for $70 million and reflects a recent trend in the news industry of big-name owners buying newspaper properties for a fraction of what they were once worth.

Liberal billionaire Warren Buffett has purchased several newspapers including recently adding the Press of Atlantic City, N.J., to the 28 daily newspapers he purchased last year.

Bezos himself got to the crux of the problem after the purchase. He wrote up a feel-good memo designed to calm the troops, stating: “So, let me start with something critical. The values of The Post do not need changing.”

In other words, one of the nation’s most institutionally left-wing, pro-Democrat newspapers will stay exactly the same. And journalists around America will cheer. Just as they do when Buffett buys newspapers. But let the Koch brothers even discuss such purchases and journos squeal like bureaucrats when people talk Sequester.

The Post curiously said Bezos “has given little indication of his ideological leanings over the years” and went on to show three ways he’s liberal.

He and his wife “have regularly donated to the campaign of Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.), the couple donated $2.5 million to “legalize same-sex marriage in Washington state” and Amazon itself is backing the rise of an Internet sales tax, designed to harm the company’s competition.

No matter how you slice it, that’s not conservative, though some claim Bezos is “libertarian.” Especially, deploying the government to drive up the cost of your competitors’ businesses with a wildly complex tax law.

The sale was big media news and all three broadcast networks covered it. Both NBC and CBS were eager to point out that the paper’s values will not change – not that journalists are liberal or anything.

NBC anchor Brian Williams called it a “bombshell” and then gave his support for lefty buyers like Buffett. “It’s part of a recent trend inwhich wealthy individuals arebecoming the saviors in manycases of traditional mainstreamand especially print media.Many cases because they believein quality work and a robustpress.”

Saviors? Well NBC is owned by the same folks who operate MSNBC, so ridiculous comments should be its stock in trade.

One of the most curious aspects of the sale was The New York Times’ oddly timed puff profile of Post Publisher Katherine Weymouth. She’s the granddaughter of “Katharine Graham, the pioneering publisher of The Washington Post.” The piece came out on Sunday, the day before the announcement. It doesn’t take a box of tinfoil or some dude calling himself “Deep Throat” to find that suspicious.

The more than 3,000-word story compared Weymouth to “royalty,” gushed with descriptions of “her athletic figure” and called her “quick-witted and no-nonsense.”

The story read like a press release even before the announced sale. Now that everyone knows the Graham family has sold, it can only mean one of two things. Either Weymouth agreed to be part of this “journalistic” travesty and hid the sale from her interviewer or, more likely, the piece was timed precisely around the sale to make Weymouth look good just before the announcement.

Those are the kinds of noises dinosaurs make when they realize they are becoming extinct – write a nice story about your competitor’s ownership because your owners are likely next in line for a farewell tour.

Or at least we can hope. 



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Renewable energy -- the data is blowing in the wind
byline: By Stephen J. Callahan


Better weather and power forecasting has many benefits. Among the most financially significant is improving the economics of renewable from wind and solar energy as well as fostering integration with conventional sources such as hydro and fossil.

If utilities can forecast, hour by hour, or better yet minute by minute, how much wind is blowing through a wind farm, or what the cloud cover will be at a solar plant, they can manage the supply and grid much more efficiently.

By knowing that the exact behavior of wind, they can reduce the need for natural gas-fired backup gas turbines and minimize costly ramp up and down events.

Boosting renewables is one of the most economic ways to reduce carbon emissions, increase energy output and thereby improve standards of living.

Although building wind and solar facilities is a significant investment, the fuel is free, unlike fossil fuel generation which costs money for every kilowatt generated.

However, to get the full benefit, it requires making the system of renewables and their back up generating capacity as efficient as possible in order to be more economically competitive with coal and natural-gas fired generating plants.

It’s no easy task when a natural gas glut has caused energy prices to plunge.

Technology will be the key factor to improving renewable system efficiency – in particular energy output forecasting. With the right conditions for investment renewable energy can be generated at enormous scale.

For example, some days, Germany gets up to 50 percent of its electricity generation from renewables. However, at the same time, many countries are planning to reduce the taxpayer-funded subsidies that helps renewable energy to be competitive with traditional energy sources.

The International Energy Agency (IEA) forecasts that renewables can surpass gas by 2016 in the global power mix, in part because of subsidies from governments, but the industry must not be complacent lest it wants to face a decline, the report has warned.

After a long legislative back and forth, Congress gave the production tax credit a one year reprieve in January, and its expiration deadline has once again started to loom and cast a shadow on the U.S. renewable industry.

Meanwhile in Europe, after the election in September, Germany—one of the top wind energy producing countries—may become the latest European country to curb financial support for renewable energy investments.

Public sector funding encourages additional capital investment, which has helped the industry grow, but the unwanted uncertainty has been a nagging hurdle for the renewable energy industry.

However, the results so far are impressive.

In the U.S., wind power topped the list of new generation sources that came on line. Last year, some 13.1 gigawatts (GW) were installed, comprising 42 percent of all new capacity, while around the world the trend is echoed, with global capacity growing by a record amount, too—44.7 GW—increasing the total installed base by 19 percent to 282.4 GW.

In most jurisdictions, utilities are required to purchase and resell any renewable energy that producers generate, but they face the challenge of integrating it into their supply portfolio and transmission system.

The roadblock for the grid operator is that they must pay the renewable producer for every watt-hour delivered. But, they must also pay a gas-turbine owner to keep some generators in standby mode in case the wind fails to blow consistently.

If the grid operator knows the exact supply coming from wind and the demand from the consumers, it can tell the stand-by turbine operator to idle down for a period of time.

Widely deployed sensors and sophisticated analytics are opening the way to much more accurate weather and energy forecasting.

For example, a new big data analytics system called the Hybrid Renewable Energy Forecasting solution(HyRef) is designed to help the energy industry monitor and predict wind and solar output and use renewable energy to maximum benefit.

Advanced techniques can produce accurate forecasts covering a single square kilometer and across different lead times (from 15 min to 72 hours). This technology will provide utilities with a clearer view of just what kind of power production they can get from wind and solar facilities. This, in turn, will allow energy companies to manage the grid to minimize of the expense of backup gas turbines.

In China, where capital investment from the public sector is not in question, State Grid Jibei Electricity Power Company is planning on using HyRef, to integrate renewable energy into the grid. Making analytics the cornerstone of Zhangbei, a 670 MW demonstration project, which is the world’s largest renewable energy initiative combining wind and solar power, energy storage and transmission.

The weather and energy output forecasting accuracy and precise grid management is projected to increase renewable power from the project by 10 percent-- enough to power 14,000 homes.

The renewable industry can’t win by over-relying on subsidies to make itself viable in the long term. The industry focus should be on relentless innovation. And no longer is innovation just about the scale of wind turbines or length of their blades, nor is it just about solar cell efficiency. It is about big data analytics, like weather modeling and energy output forecasting.

By addressing the challenges of long-term integration costs into the system for large scale generation and reducing the need for subsidized capital investment, renewables can once and for all stake their claim in the broader mix of power generation around the world.

Ultimately, that is good for the planet as much as it is to the consumer.





headline: Why the fight to defeat ObamaCare is good politics, not bad politics
byline: By Matt Kibbe


As internal and external forces converge to delay and defund implementation of the massive government takeover of health care, the only thing standing between ObamaCare and its impending demise is the “August recess.”

There once was a time when the August recess was a chance for lawmakers to rest, connect with a few important donors and go through the motions of constituent meetings back in their districts. But this year, like the last few, is different.

Once again, members of Congress will return home to find constituents demanding answers and action. Top on their list: use every tool available to stop the costly mistake of ObamaCare before it is too late to easily reverse another cratering entitlement program.

The cracks in the besieged walls of ObamaCare are already starting to show.

Earlier this summer, the Obama administration finally admitted what the rest of us have known all along: that its premier legislative accomplishment is bureaucratically unimplementable and politically toxic.

Opposition to ObamaCare is becoming the best source of bipartisanship in Washington today.

That’s the takeaway from the announcement that the administration will give large employers until (at least) 2015 to provide insurance to employees and will waive the employer data reporting needed to ensure that individuals don’t take premium subsidies they’re not entitle to.

Conveniently, these moves will delay some of ObamaCare’s most burdensome requirements until after the 2014 mid-term elections and help accelerate employer dumping, in order to increase the exchange rolls.

Problems such as employer dumping, reduced hours and hiring, and unmanageable costs for small business — all things conservatives warned about from the outset — are making ObamaCare increasingly unattractive even to President Obama’s once-loyal supporters.

Even the hardest core of his traditional allies, labor unions, are now trashing the plan.

In a letter to congressional leaders this summer, the presidents of several major unions declared they could “no longer stand silent in the face of elements of the Affordable Care Act that will destroy the very health and wellbeing of our members along with millions of other hardworking Americans.”

During a recent vote in the House of Representatives — to codify Mr. Obama’s one-year mandate delay for large employers and delay the individual mandate for the rest of us — 22 Democrats voted for fairness and political realism over government coercion and socialist utopianism. Opposition to ObamaCare is becoming the best source of bipartisanship in Washington today.

When members of Congress started to complain about the exorbitant premiums they and their employees would face under ObamaCare plans, the president personally intervened to make sure the federal government would cover the tab.

Meanwhile, Americans on the private rolls get no such special treatment; they remain on their own to figure out how to pay the higher costs brought on by the law’s mandates, regulations, and price controls.

But the administration’s delays and its crumbling coalition were only the early signs of impending doom for the program.

The second gained steam last Tuesday, when Sens. Mike Lee (R-Utah), Ted Cruz (R-Texas) and Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) took to the Senate floor to call on their Republican colleagues to defund ObamaCare altogether through the next must-pass continuing resolution.

They are predictably being accused of threatening a dreaded government shutdown, when what they are actually demanding is an ObamaCare shutdown.

Importantly, the small band of senators have set the stage for an August recess and a national debate that will once again show the power of the people.

Establishment Republicans like Senators John Cornyn (R-Texas), Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), and Richard Burr (R-N.C.), who oppose correcting this mistake before more damage is done, will have to answer for themselves at county fairs, town halls and constituent meetings across their states and districts this month. 

By throwing in the towel before the debate, they are making the calculation that fighting ObamaCare is bad politics.

That’s surprising if you look at public opinion.

On July 24 a CBS News/New York Times poll showed 54 percent of Americans oppose ObamaCare, despite four full years of Democratic salesmanship. The Morning Consult July tracking poll finds that 77% of independents, 78% of 18-29 year olds, 75% of women, 73% of blacks, and 80% of Hispanics think the individual mandate should be repealed or delayed. So do 65% of Democrats.

The establishment politicians will have to answer to grassroots activists and explain why they will vote for a budget that funds ObamaCare. And around the country, they will see college students burning their “ObamaCare cards” in a symbolic show of civil disobedience toward reforms that force young adults in their twenties and thirties to pay for overpriced coverage that doesn’t meet their individual needs.

Remember how the sky was going to fall if the sequestration took effect? Criminals would roam the streets, grandma would be kicked out of the nursing home, and planes would collide in the sky?

This time the establishment will hide behind the elderly, the military, veterans, and national security. We’ll hear “respected” insiders swear that they support defunding, just not on a must-pass bill — for “tactical” reasons. But a government shutdown, in addition to be undesired and unnecessary, would not in fact harm national security or the rest of the litany of vulnerable people.

There have been about a dozen government shutdowns since 1980; most lasted a few days at most; and none hurt anybody, because functions deemed essential always continue while the two sides negotiate.

If a shutdown does occur, the blame will rest squarely on those who support government-run health care or who think stopping it is “just too hard.”

After years of hard work, the outsiders — the American people — finally have champions in the House and Senate.

The new crew elected in 2010 and 2012 are doing something novel in Washington: keeping their campaign promise to explore every avenue for correcting the mistake of ObamaCare.

They will return to their constituencies this recess as heroes; their colleagues risk returning as part of the problem.





headline: Obama's sorry foreign policy retreat
byline: By Josef Joffe


'We are extremely disappointed," the White House press secretary said after Moscow granted asylum to fugitive NSA leaker Edward Snowden. A nice understatement. Washington is now looking at the greatest counterintelligence failure since the Rosenbergs betrayed nuclear know-how to Stalin some 60 years ago. Now the Russians have Mr. Snowden's hard disks to unearth more U.S. secrets than could be stolen by a battalion of spies.

President Vladimir Putin has it in his hands to endlessly embarrass the U.S. by releasing choice bits and pieces from the Snowden trove, or to threaten to do so to keep Washington on its best behavior. After this slap, "extremely disappointed" is the diplomatic equivalent of pouting—unbecoming to a great power.

Why did Mr. Putin decide to thumb his nose at the U.S. after playing cat-and-mouse for six weeks? Easy—because he could. He has taken the measure of Barack Obama, concluding that there isn't much there there, to paraphrase the president on the State Department's emails about Benghazi.

To continue reading Josef Joffe's op-ed in the Wall Street Journal, click here.





headline: Jimmy Carter's ghost stalks Obama White House
byline: By Liz Peek


Vague terrorist threats shutting down nineteen of our embassies, Russian strongman Putin thumbing his nose at President Obama, Iran jerking our chain – the U.S. hasn’t looked this cowardly on the world stage since the Jimmy Carter administration.

Here at home, too, we’ve gone back to the Carter future; unemployment is high, Keynesian economics are all the rage, our professorial president is increasingly whiny and ineffectual; all that’s missing is a cardigan sweater and that infernal violin. 

Our recent contre-temps with Russia is a throw-back to the weak-kneed Carter era. President Vladimir Putin has granted temporary asylum to NSA leaker and fugitive Edward Snowden, despite frantic efforts by the White House to take the traitor into custody.

Mr. Obama is said to be livid; after all, he has pursued a chummy relationship with Putin for years.

The similarities between Obama and Carter are not confined to foreign fiascos.

At one point his eagerness translated into a seeming breach of faith with his own country, when he was caught on tape promising Putin (via his former number two Dmitri Medvedev) even greater accommodation on missile defense once reelected. Apparently the numerous earlier rebuffs from the Russian bully – on Iran, on missile defense, on Syria etc. -- made no impression; Obama is ever hopeful.

Jimmy Carter was also unprepared to deal with Russia. NATO allies, worried about the Soviet deployment of longer-range, more capable SS-20 missiles in Europe beginning in 1976, pushed Carter to counter with U.S. cruise and Pershing missiles, to maintain strategic parity.

When Carter and Brezhnev met to sign Salt II, Carter whiffed; not only did he fail to win any agreement on the SS-20s, he never even broached the NATO demands.

Helmut Schmidt, who had spearheaded the strategy, was furious. Later, he described Jimmy Carter’s profound ignorance (and improbable optimism) about the Soviet Union: “He wasn’t aware that the Russians don’t know and never have known citizen’s rights,” the former German chancellor wrote.

In 1980, President Carter asked the Senate to discontinue consideration of the Salt II treaty in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, a stunning rebuke to U.S. interests. The same year, he ordered a boycott of the Moscow Olympics.

Both Carter and Obama came to office convinced that by dint of righteousness or personality they could win over our enemies. That it was just a matter of persuasion.

President George W. Bush is widely scorned these days for attempting to export democracy to the peoples of other lands; Mr. Obama, like Carter before him, has sought kindness and justice from the likes of Hugo Chavez and Bashar-Al-Assad. Which is more naïve?

Naivete is costly. Both the Carter and Obama administrations have been distinguished by the rare murder of an ambassador.

Even before the Iran hostage crisis that came to symbolize the failures of his presidency, Jimmy Carter was “shocked and saddened” when the Russians, along with Afghan security forces, killed Adolph Dubs, the U.S. ambassador to Afghanistan. 

On Obama’s watch, of course, we lost Christopher Stevens, ambassador to Libya and three others; the president called it a “shocking attack.” 

In both cases, critics charged the White House with incompetence and carelessness for not protecting our own.

Iran has proved a testing ground for both Carter and Obama, as the despots leading that country took the measure of U.S. leadership and found it wanting.

Under Carter, Iran took 52 U.S. citizens hostage in one of our country’s most humiliating chapters.

More recently, Iran’s former president Ahmadinejad has continued to publicly spurn Obama’s efforts to rein in that country’s nuclear ambitions, at times driving a wedge between the U.S. and ally Israel. 

Obama’s lack of response to the mass slaughter in Syria and scrambled interactions with Egypt harks back to Carter’s impotence in the face of the 1979 OPEC oil embargo. 

In Egypt today, the United States is ignored by both Islamist supporters of now-deposed President Morsi and also by the military; we are blamed by both sides for the chaos in that country. That’s quite an accomplishment, given the enormous aid we have ladled out to Egypt for decades. Unimaginably, it is EU foreign policy chief Cathy Ashton who is attempting to mediate between the two factions.

The parallels between the Carter and Obama presidencies are not accidental. Both men were elected in what amounted to a national rejection of their predecessors.

Neither candidate had any significant executive experience or foreign policy chops.

Carter ran on being an honest man – not Tricky Dick Nixon. Obama ran on being likeable and eager to unite the country – not arrogant and divisive George W. Bush.

Both men promised change, and fulfilled that promise. Unhappily, they did not always deliver change for the better.

The similarities between Obama and Carter are not confined to foreign fiascos.

Domestically, both have struggled to ignite growth and lower unemployment; both have clung to a profound belief in the powers of deficit spending and efficacy of federal meddling.

Faced with soaring inflation, Carter imposed price controls that caused rampant confusion and slowed growth; he also introduced gasoline rationing that led the country to quite literally run out of gas.

The same urge to tinker bedevils Obama, who cannot understand why consumers do not line up to buy the electric cars that he has required Detroit to manufacture, or why bankrolling uncompetitive “green” energy companies are bets that go bad.

Instead of searching for private market resolutions to problems like soaring medical costs, Obama chose to funnel even more of the economy through the federal spigot. Who today believes that ObamaCare is the best possible answer to reining in the cost of healthcare?

One of the few divides between the Obama presidency and that of Jimmy Carter is that Mr. Obama won reelection. Pity.



Liz Peek is a writer who contributes frequently to FoxNews.com. She is a financial columnist who also writes for The Fiscal Times. For more visit LizPeek.com. Follow her on Twitter@LizPeek.



headline: Call Hasan's Ft. Hood attack by its true name
byline: By Michael Goodwin


It never made a whit of sense when the shooting that left 13 people dead at the Fort Hood Army base was labeled “workplace violence” instead of terrorism. The designation now stands as downright preposterous after Tuesday’s opening trial statement by the shooter.

“We the Mujahideen are imperfect Muslims trying to establish the perfect religion in the land of the supreme god,” said Maj. Nidal Hasan at his court-martial. “The evidence will clearly show that I am the shooter. The dead bodies will show that war is an ugly thing.”

Hasan, acting as his own lawyer, is also charged with wounding 32 others in the 2009 rampage. He faces the death penalty.

President Obama called the Ft. Hood shooting “violent jihad” last May but the army’s “workplace” designation remains.

His references to religion and war show his motivation. He fired at unarmed Americans, most of them soldiers, as an act of terror in service to Islam.

Although President Obama called the shooting “violent jihad” last May, the army’s “workplace” designation remains. The difference is not merely semantic. It means military victims are not eligible for Purple Hearts, and survivors do not qualify for certain benefits.

It also means Hasan is not treated as an enemy combatant, and still collects his paycheck; taxpayers have given him over $300,000 since the attack.

The claim that this is an ordinary criminal case is belied by courtroom precautions against another terror attack. “Guards stood watch with long assault rifles outside the courthouse,” Fox News reports. “A long row of shipping freight containers, stacked three high, created a fence around the building, which was almost entirely hidden by 15-foot-tall stacks of heavy, shock-absorbing barriers.”

I don’t often recommend petitions, but there is one urging the Defense Department to label the shooting what it is — an act of terror. You can find it at National Review online. Add your name to help end this outrage.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: The tough truth behind Obama’s mortgage goals
byline: By Peter Morici


President Obama wants private banks to use depositor and investor funds to write 30-year fixed rate mortgages at affordable rates. He won’t admit those goals and others imposed by Congress require the federal government to guarantee mortgages and banks against failure.

Mortgages require banks to borrow short and lend long. They pay depositors and investors interest rates that fluctuate and offer funds to homeowners at fixed rates for the duration of loans. 

Thirty-year mortgages require banks to bear three risks: homeowners will keep their jobs and not become disabled; rates paid by banks for money won’t rise above the loan rates, and homes remain marketable at prices equal to outstanding loan balances.

Obama won’t admit that in today’s economy mortgages are simply too risky for private investors.

Bankers are not clairvoyant, and before World War II, most mortgages were no more than three to five years with balloon payments when loans came due. Then federally sponsored, but privately-owned, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac began purchasing from banks mortgages that met stringent conditions—prime loans—and a wholly private market emerged for sub-prime and jumbo loans.

Fannie, Freddie and Wall Street investment houses sold mortgages bundled into bonds to insurance companies, pension funds and others. Fannie and Freddie guaranteed the loans behind their bonds by charging borrowers fees equal to a few percent of their loan, while investors that bought securities backed by sub-prime and jumbo loans took their chances as if they were buying corporate bonds.

The system was premised on banks carefully evaluating borrowers—verifying their incomes and stability of their jobs—and appraisers accurately valuing properties.

Leading up to the financial crisis, banks and appraisers did a sloppy job, and excessive lending drove home prices to bubble levels. When those collapsed, Fannie, Freddie and private banks required bailouts—homeowners lost jobs, couldn’t pay what they owed, and banks couldn’t sell foreclosed properties.

Bankrupt, Fannie and Freddie were purchased by the Treasury Department for $188 billion, and the FDIC absorbed the losses of smaller failed banks. The Treasury and Federal Reserve bailed out the biggest banks.

Prior to the crisis, Congress forced banks to lend in disadvantaged neighborhoods, where property values are more subject to collapse and job security less certain. Adding those risks to bank portfolios guaranteed many would take outsized losses.

Now banks are reluctant to write mortgages they can’t sell to Fannie and Freddie -- making the federal government the primary source of mortgage finance.

The president wants to get private banks back into the mortgage business and require shareholders to shoulder risks the government now bears, but he won’t admit that in today’s economy mortgages are simply too risky for private investors.

Thanks to slow growth and global competition, borrowers are less likely to have stable jobs.

When families were supported by one wage earner, non-working spouses could seek employment when primary breadwinners became unemployed. Today’s families, depending on two paychecks, don’t have reserve capacity.

Dodd-Frank raised lending standards but compliance costs compel community banks to sell out to their larger brethren, who are less able to assess the character of borrowers. Small bank lending officers know who in a community always pays their debts, but loan officers from New York or Charlotte lack that knowledge.

The president wants to make loans affordable for everyone but banks can’t lend in certain communities without charging higher rates to compensate for bigger risks. Many in Congress and the president associate this with racism when larger risks are really the issue.

No president, Republican or Democrat, has been able to find a way around those facts. If Obama wants banks to lend money at 4 or 5 percent when inflation is 2 or 3—and lend at similar rates in disadvantaged neighborhoods—then neither privately owned banks nor bond investors will take those risks without government guarantees and subsidies behind the loans and the solvency of banks.





headline: Obama must accept responsibility for the sluggish jobs picture
byline: By Peter Morici


The Labor Department reported Friday that the economy added 162,000 jobs in July, after adding 188,000 in June. Unemployment fell to 7.4 percent, largely because 240,000 adults left the labor force.

Businesses continued the shift toward contingent workers. In July, 103,000 more Americans reported working part-time.

The growing importance of services like retailing and hospitality, and the rigidity and visceral anti-business campaigns of unions drive this trend; however, Obama Care’s mandates for employer paid health insurance coverage also impel the use of more part-time workers.

The Obama administration’s anti-business regulatory policies and rhetoric are creating a crisis of confidence in the business community.

Overall, the jobs count may be up but for most working families and recent college graduates the situation is grim. If you add in discouraged adults and part-timers who want full-time employment, the unemployment rate then becomes 14.0 percent. And, for many years, inflation-adjusted wages have been falling and income inequality has been rising.

President Obama’s policies and attitudes toward business carry some considerable burden of responsibility. Those have institutionalized a buyers’ market for day labor and damned many recent college graduates to a lifetime of debt as they can’t find jobs that would allow them to pay off burdensome student loans.

Even with more full time positions, the pace of jobs creation is well short of what is needed. About 360,000 jobs would lower unemployment to 6 percent, but that would require GDP growth in the range of 4 to 5 percent. Over the last four years, the pace has been a paltry 2.2 percent.

Stronger growth is possible. Four years into the Reagan recovery, after a deeper recession than Obama inherited, GDP was advancing at a 5.1 percent annual pace, and jobs creation was quite robust.

Near term, defense cutbacks that President Obama extracted from Congress last fall have subtracted some $62 billion from federal purchases. An additional $42 billion in sequestration cuts, and $200 billion in higher taxes demanded by the president, are further reducing government consumer spending in the second and third quarters. 

Longer term, more rapid growth requires importing less and exporting more. Dealing with the $540 billion trade deficit requires drilling for more oil offshore and in Alaska, and substantively addressing China and Japan’s undervalued currencies and other protectionist policies.

Obama has flat out refused to even discuss proposals from liberal and conservative economists alike on these issues. 

Healthy growth also requires sound stewardship at the Federal Reserve -- not a new chairman bent on inflating the country out of its problems, or inclined to support left-wing causes aligned with those hostile to business.

What's essential to get things moving is right sizing business regulations to make investing in new jobs less expensive. Yes, regulatory protections are needed to protect the environment, consumers and financial stability but those must be delivered cost effectively to add genuine value.
Overall the president must cultivate a climate more receptive to domestic investment, instead of treating private-sector leaders as likely recidivists to a white collar prison for those guilty of environmental and other crimes against the people.

The administration’s anti-business regulatory policies and rhetoric are creating a crisis of confidence in the business community as surely as George Bush’s neglect cultivated arrogant and tragic risk taking on Wall Street.

Overall, to create more jobs means that the White House needs to trim tax increases and spending cuts, and engage in more realistic and less-ideological trade, energy and regulatory policies. Sadly, these are words the White House and many on Capitol Hill simply does not want to hear.





headline: Domestic spying is dangerous to freedom
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


How is it that the government can charge Edward Snowden with espionage for telling a journalist that the feds have been spying on all Americans and many of our allies, but the NSA itself, in a public relations campaign intended to win support for its lawlessness, can reveal secrets and do so with impunity? That question goes to the heart of the rule of law in a free society.

Since Snowden’s June 6th revelations about massive NSA spying, we have learned that all Americans who communicate via telephone or the Internet (who doesn’t?) have had all of their communications swept up by the federal government for two-plus years.

The government initially claimed that the NSA has gathered only telephone numbers and billing data. Now we know that the NSA has captured and stored the content of trillions of telephone conversations, texts and emails, and can access that content at the press of a few computer keys.

All of this happened in the dark, with the permission of President Obama, with the knowledge and consent of fewer than 20 members of Congress who were forbidden from doing anything about it by the laws they themselves had written, and based on secret legal arguments accepted by a secret court that keeps its records secret even from the judges who sit on the court.

It's never been explained in a public court how putting the intimate thoughts of all Americans who use telephones and the Internet under the federal microscope helps to fight foreign terrorists.

This massive spying -- metadata gathering, as the NSA calls it -- was also done notwithstanding statements NSA officials made in public under oath and in secret classified briefings to Congress, which effectively denied it.

The denials were in one case admitted to -- “least untruthful,” as the director of national intelligence later called his own testimony. Then, when even members of Congress who usually support a muscular national security apparatus realized that they, too, had been lied to by the NSA, the NSA responded with its own leaks.

It has leaked, for example, that as a consequence of its spying it has prevented at least 50 foreign-originated plots from harming Americans.

It eventually backed off that number and declined to reveal with specificity what it independently learned and how that knowledge foiled the plots. But we do know that its colleagues in the FBI were participants in many of those plots, which means they weren’t real plots at all -- just government stings going after dopes and dupes.

Last week, the NSA leaked that it captured actionable intelligence of grave and imminent danger to our embassies in the Middle East. The implication it wants you to draw here is that because it caught Al Qaeda operatives talking in code in Yemen about deadly deeds they plan to perpetrate in the Arabian Peninsula, somehow the NSA's spying on 300 million innocent Americans is constitutional, lawful, effective and therefore worth the loss of freedom.

Earlier this week, we learned that other federal agencies of alphabet nomenclature -- the DHS, the DoJ, the DoD, the DEA, the CIA, the IRS, the FBI -- all want access to the NSA’s database, and it has shared some of it with most of them.

Also this week, former DEA (Drug Enforcement Administration) agents, claiming this has been going on for at least a decade, acknowledged that the DEA regularly receives raw data from the NSA and uses that data to commence criminal investigations.

Down the slippery slope we go.

The whole NSA spying apparatus was sold to Congress as a limited mechanism for combating foreign terrorists. How putting the intimate thoughts of all Americans who use telephones and the Internet under the federal microscope helps to fight foreign terrorists has never been explained in a public court -- only in a secret one. But using this extra-constitutional means to fight crime brings us closer to a Soviet-style and value-free police state.

The Constitution intentionally has placed values in the path of law enforcement and national security so as to maintain our natural rights.

Those values are generally articulated throughout the Constitution and specifically addressed in the Fourth Amendment.

The linchpin of those values is the natural right to be left alone. All persons -- even bad guys -- have that inalienable right, and the government may only invade that right when it can identify a bad guy and articulate the probable cause it has to believe he is committing criminal acts.

The rest of us -- those for whom there is no probable cause of criminal acts -- retain that right, and it cannot be taken away from us by the supine acquiescence of Congress or an unnamed judge in a secret court. That constitutional requirement -- and that requirement alone -- has kept Americans free from Soviet-style persecutions.

Now comes Obama, who is quarterbacking the most massive end run around the Constitution in modern times by invading everyone’s right to be left alone in the name of national security, but in reality for any governmental purpose the government wishes. And for the unfortunate people whose criminal prosecutions have commenced from the NSA’s supposedly anti-terror spying, the feds are refusing to reveal to lawyers what the source of the negative information against them was. That, of course, violates the constitutionally protected right to confront all of one’s accusers, especially those who have been paid for their accusations.

What’s going on here?

It is painfully obvious that the government is not troubled by its own violation of the Constitution. The people in the government who have done this are far more concerned with their retention of power than they are with protecting our personal liberties. That explains their perverse view that when Snowden frustrates them with a whistle-blowing leak, he can be prosecuted, but when they rebut him with their own leaks, they are to be lauded. That is not the rule of law in a free society.

What will the NSA spies seek next? Our passwords? We already know the answer to that one. They asked for them last week.





headline: Can Snowden survive Russia and Putin?
byline: By Matthew Dunn


The pro-Snowden lobby should not be rejoicing after Thursday’s news that the PRISM whistleblower’s been allowed to move into Russia for 1 year.

Snowden’s situation has been completely manipulated by Putin, in order to serve the president’s interests. The Russian premier’s given Snowden a year of purgatory. I’m not sure Snowden has the mental strength or means to survive what could lay ahead for him.

History has shown that Russia doesn’t hero worship Westerners who flee to Moscow. The most telling example of that is the Cambridge spyring. Recruited by Soviet intelligence while studying at Cambridge University in the 1930s, the British men went on to comprehensively spy on behalf of the Soviet Union and they did so due to their belief that life in Russia was better. They later learned it was not.

I’m not sure Snowden has the mental strength or means to survive what could lay ahead for him.

All members of the spy ring were supremely intelligent, high achievers with sensitive positions in government, and the most powerful of them was serving British intelligence officer Kim Philby. In 1951 he tipped off two other members of the ring – Donald Maclean and Guy Burgess – that they were under suspicion. Both fled to Moscow.

In 1963, Philby himself decided that the net was closing in on him, and urgently contacted his Soviet handler. After weeks of deliberation, the USSR agreed to arrange his flight to Moscow and to give him asylum. But upon arrival in Moscow airport, Philby was told that the KGB had changed its mind about appointing him as a colonel in their intelligence agency, that he would be under virtual house arrest in a tiny apartment, and that he would receive a meager 500 rubles per month.

Before Philby died of heart failure in 1988, he was under constant Russian surveillance and his entire life was bugged. Philby knew this and drank heavily to numb the pain of his hellish existence, suffered severe depression, on more than one occasion slashed his wrists, and told his wife that his earlier belief in the communist dream had turned out to be utterly wrong.

Burgess and Maclean suffered a similar existence in Moscow, until their deaths.

Philby got nothing but Russian pain, despite what he did for the motherland.

Snowden’s prospects are worse because he’s not a top Russian spy like Philby. Instead, he’s a nomadic snitch with a grudge. Putin – formerly a colonel in the KGB – will view him as such.

And yet Putin still decided to give Snowden a visa.

But only a 1-year visa, and that is telling.

If Putin had given Snowden long term asylum, it would have been a catastrophe for U.S.-Russian bilateral diplomatic interests, and Putin knew that. But, at the same time he also knew that Snowden could be used to make Putin appear strong to Russians by defeating Obama’s desire to get his hands on Snowden’s throat during the next twelve months.

In giving Snowden a 1 year visa, Putin deliberately slapped Obama rather than give him a sucker punch. It makes a point, but keeps US-Russian relations open.

That’s arch politics.

As a result, Snowden has been temporarily flicked in to Russia, with probably no prospects and limited funds. He’s been given a short future in a land that does not like the weak.

Will he survive the next 12 months and the uncertainty beyond? Time will tell. Time also told that more important and intellectually superior men did not survive that kind of hell.





headline: Renewable energy -- the data is blowing in the wind
byline: By Stephen J. Callahan


Better weather and power forecasting has many benefits. Among the most financially significant is improving the economics of renewable from wind and solar energy as well as fostering integration with conventional sources such as hydro and fossil.

If utilities can forecast, hour by hour, or better yet minute by minute, how much wind is blowing through a wind farm, or what the cloud cover will be at a solar plant, they can manage the supply and grid much more efficiently.

By knowing that the exact behavior of wind, they can reduce the need for natural gas-fired backup gas turbines and minimize costly ramp up and down events.

Boosting renewables is one of the most economic ways to reduce carbon emissions, increase energy output and thereby improve standards of living.

Although building wind and solar facilities is a significant investment, the fuel is free, unlike fossil fuel generation which costs money for every kilowatt generated.

However, to get the full benefit, it requires making the system of renewables and their back up generating capacity as efficient as possible in order to be more economically competitive with coal and natural-gas fired generating plants.

It’s no easy task when a natural gas glut has caused energy prices to plunge.

Technology will be the key factor to improving renewable system efficiency – in particular energy output forecasting. With the right conditions for investment renewable energy can be generated at enormous scale.

For example, some days, Germany gets up to 50 percent of its electricity generation from renewables. However, at the same time, many countries are planning to reduce the taxpayer-funded subsidies that helps renewable energy to be competitive with traditional energy sources.

The International Energy Agency (IEA) forecasts that renewables can surpass gas by 2016 in the global power mix, in part because of subsidies from governments, but the industry must not be complacent lest it wants to face a decline, the report has warned.

After a long legislative back and forth, Congress gave the production tax credit a one year reprieve in January, and its expiration deadline has once again started to loom and cast a shadow on the U.S. renewable industry.

Meanwhile in Europe, after the election in September, Germany—one of the top wind energy producing countries—may become the latest European country to curb financial support for renewable energy investments.

Public sector funding encourages additional capital investment, which has helped the industry grow, but the unwanted uncertainty has been a nagging hurdle for the renewable energy industry.

However, the results so far are impressive.

In the U.S., wind power topped the list of new generation sources that came on line. Last year, some 13.1 gigawatts (GW) were installed, comprising 42 percent of all new capacity, while around the world the trend is echoed, with global capacity growing by a record amount, too—44.7 GW—increasing the total installed base by 19 percent to 282.4 GW.

In most jurisdictions, utilities are required to purchase and resell any renewable energy that producers generate, but they face the challenge of integrating it into their supply portfolio and transmission system.

The roadblock for the grid operator is that they must pay the renewable producer for every watt-hour delivered. But, they must also pay a gas-turbine owner to keep some generators in standby mode in case the wind fails to blow consistently.

If the grid operator knows the exact supply coming from wind and the demand from the consumers, it can tell the stand-by turbine operator to idle down for a period of time.

Widely deployed sensors and sophisticated analytics are opening the way to much more accurate weather and energy forecasting.

For example, a new big data analytics system called the Hybrid Renewable Energy Forecasting solution(HyRef) is designed to help the energy industry monitor and predict wind and solar output and use renewable energy to maximum benefit.

Advanced techniques can produce accurate forecasts covering a single square kilometer and across different lead times (from 15 min to 72 hours). This technology will provide utilities with a clearer view of just what kind of power production they can get from wind and solar facilities. This, in turn, will allow energy companies to manage the grid to minimize of the expense of backup gas turbines.

In China, where capital investment from the public sector is not in question, State Grid Jibei Electricity Power Company is planning on using HyRef, to integrate renewable energy into the grid. Making analytics the cornerstone of Zhangbei, a 670 MW demonstration project, which is the world’s largest renewable energy initiative combining wind and solar power, energy storage and transmission.

The weather and energy output forecasting accuracy and precise grid management is projected to increase renewable power from the project by 10 percent-- enough to power 14,000 homes.

The renewable industry can’t win by over-relying on subsidies to make itself viable in the long term. The industry focus should be on relentless innovation. And no longer is innovation just about the scale of wind turbines or length of their blades, nor is it just about solar cell efficiency. It is about big data analytics, like weather modeling and energy output forecasting.

By addressing the challenges of long-term integration costs into the system for large scale generation and reducing the need for subsidized capital investment, renewables can once and for all stake their claim in the broader mix of power generation around the world.

Ultimately, that is good for the planet as much as it is to the consumer.





headline: Will Team Obama ignore the rule of law and preemptively veto Pebble mine?
byline: By John Shively


Today in Washington, a landmark environmental law is under attack. Politically motivated groups are pressing the Obama administration to ignore the National Environmental Policy Act and rush a decision on a copper mine in Alaska.

This lobbying and PR campaign is probably the greatest threat NEPA has faced since it became law more than 40 years ago, but public awareness is low.

How has this threat gone unnoticed?

Probably because the company proposing the mine – the Pebble Partnership, where I serve as CEO – isn’t the one putting NEPA in danger.

My company wants to invest at least $6 billion building the Pebble mine. We expect it will support roughly 15,000 jobs across the U.S. for at least three decades.

Instead, environmental groups are running the campaign to subvert and evade NEPA. This runs counter to many political stereotypes, I know. But the campaign is real, and if the activists win, the consequences will be felt across the nation.

The Pebble deposit, located on state land in southwestern Alaska, is one of the world’s largest copper reserves.

This mineral is essential to modern life. It is used in everything from power lines to smartphones to automobiles. The U.S. imports about 35 percent of the copper it needs.

My company wants to invest at least $6 billion building the Pebble mine, and we expect it will support roughly 15,000 jobs across the U.S. for three decades and perhaps much longer.

So far, we have spent eight years and over $500 million conducting geological, engineering and environmental studies to prepare a formal permit application to state and federal regulators.

When the application is submitted, NEPA will be triggered, subjecting both our mine plan and our environmental safeguards to years of exhaustive review by regulatory agencies, environmental groups and the general public.

My company will have to prove that building and operating the mine won’t hurt Bristol Bay’s salmon populations and the region’s commercial fishing industry; that southwestern Alaska can have both fishing jobs and mining jobs.

If we can’t clear the high hurdle set by the NEPA process, we won’t get a permit, and there will be no mine.

But don’t take my word for it.

The New York-based Natural Resources Defense Council calls NEPA an “incredibly successful law” which has “helped preserve some of America’s most treasured places.”

NRDC President Frances Beinecke hailed NEPA as the “green Magna Carta,” which has “worked well to protect our national treasures and resources.”

The NRDC has even fought sensible bipartisan reforms to NEPA, fearing they would put regulatory reviews on the “fast track.” NEPA “works as it stands,” Beinecke says, “and it should stay that way.”

Except, that is, when NEPA gets in the way of the NRDC’s agenda.

To block the Pebble mine, the NRDC is proposing the ultimate NEPA “fast track.” Rather than wait for my company to apply for a permit, and rely on the “green Magna Carta,” Beinecke and movie star Robert Redford are demanding the Obama administration act now by issuing what’s known as a “preemptive veto.”

This unprecedented and legally dubious move would completely circumvent NEPA.

It would prevent my company from submitting a permit application, and replace years of painstaking NEPA reviews and due process with a snap political decision.

In everyday terms, it would be like a teacher failing a student before they take the exam.

For now, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency hasn’t rewarded the NRDC’s hypocrisy by issuing a premature veto. But the EPA did rush out a “watershed assessment” that speculates about copper mining impacts for Bristol Bay.

Instead of waiting for our permit application, EPA simply guessed what the mine would look like, assumed my company would use century-old technology and environmental practices, and relied on so-called research from anti-mining advocacy groups like Earthworks.

This report is completely unscientific, but predictably, the NRDC says it’s good enough to justify premature action by the EPA.

This isn’t just a problem for Alaska.

If environmental activists can kill one project by evading the NEPA process, you can bet they will use the same strategy again and again, until it’s routine.

In fact, activists are already planning a Bristol Bay-style “watershed assessment” for the Great Lakes, which could be used against all kinds of construction projects in the industrial Midwest.

That’s because tens of thousands of other projects nationwide, including highways and housing developments, need the same kind of earthmoving permits as the Pebble mine.

According to consulting firm The Brattle Group, projects that go through this permitting program are worth $220 billion a year to the U.S. economy.

I respect people’s questions about the Pebble mine. But those questions should be answered according to science, engineering and the law – not the political demands of activist groups.





headline: The truth shall keep us free -- Edward Snowden has awakened a giant
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


Which is more dangerous to personal liberty in a free society: a renegade who tells an inconvenient truth about government law-breaking, or government officials who lie about what the renegade revealed?

That’s the core issue in the great public debate this summer, as Americans come to the realization that their government has concocted a system of laws violative of the natural law, profoundly repugnant to the Constitution and shrouded in secrecy.

The liberty of which I write is the right to privacy: the right to be left alone. The Framers jealously and zealously guarded this right by imposing upon government agents intentionally onerous burdens before letting them invade it.

Whatever one thinks of Snowden’s world-traveling odyssey he has awakened a giant.

They did so in the Fourth Amendment, using language that permits the government to invade that right only in the narrowest of circumstances.

The linchpin of those circumstances is “probable cause” of evidence of crime in “the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.”

If the government cannot tell a judge specifically what evidence of crime it is looking for and precisely from whom, a judge may not issue a search warrant, and privacy -- the natural human yearning that comes from within all of us -- will remain where it naturally resides, outside the government’s reach.

Congress is the chief culprit here, because it has enacted laws that have lowered the constitutional bar that the feds must meet in order for judges to issue search warrants. And it has commanded that this be done in secret.

And I mean secret.

The judges of the FISA court -- the court empowered by Congress to issue search warrants on far less than probable cause, and without describing the places to be searched or the persons or things to be seized -- are not permitted to retain any records of their work. They cannot use their own writing materials or carry BlackBerries or iPhones in their own courtrooms, chambers or conference rooms. They cannot retain copies of any documents they’ve signed. Only National Security Agency staffers can keep these records.

Indeed, when Edward Snowden revealed a copy of an order signed by FISA court Judge Roger Vinson -- directing Verizon to turn over phone records of all of its 113,000,000 U.S. customers in direct and profound violation of the individualized probable cause commanded by the Constitution -- Vinson himself did not have a copy of that order. Truly, this is the only court in the country in which the judges keep no records of their rulings.

At the same time that Vinson signed that order, NSA staffers, in compliance with their statutory obligations, told select members of Congress about it, and they, too, were sworn to secrecy. Oregon Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden was so troubled when he learned this -- a terrible truth that he agreed not to reveal -- that he mused aloud that the Obama administration had a radical and terrifying interpretation of certain national security statutes.

But he did more than muse about it. He asked Gen. James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, who was under oath and at a public congressional hearing, whether his spies were gathering data on millions of Americans. Clapper said no. The general later acknowledged that his answer was untruthful, but he claimed it was the “least untruthful” reply he could have given. This “least untruthful” nonsense is not a recognized defense to the crime of perjury.

After we learned that the feds are spying on nearly all Americans, that they possess our texts and emails and have access to our phone conversations, Gen. Keith Alexander, who runs the NSA, was asked under oath whether his spies have the ability to read emails and listen to telephone calls. He answered, “No, we don’t have that authority.” Since the questioner -- FBI agent turned Congressman Mike Rogers -- was in cahoots with the general in keeping Americans in the dark about unconstitutional search warrants, there was no follow-up question. In a serious public interrogation, a committee chair interested in the truth would have directed the general to answer the question that was asked.

Since that deft and misleading act, former NSA staffers have told Fox News that the feds can read any email and listen to any phone call, and Alexander and Rogers know that. So Alexander’s “no,” just like his boss’s “no,” was a lie at worst and seriously misleading at best.

This is not an academic argument. The oath to tell the truth -- “the whole truth and nothing but the truth” -- also makes those who intentionally mislead Congress subject to prosecution for perjury.

President Obama is smarter than his generals. He smoothly told a friendly interviewer and while not under oath that the feds are not listening to our phone calls or reading our emails. He, of course, could not claim that they lack the ability to do so, because we all now know that he knows they can.

These Snowden revelations continue to cast light on the feds when they prefer darkness. Whatever one thinks of Snowden’s world-traveling odyssey to avoid the inhumane treatment the feds visited upon Bradley Manning, another whistleblower who exposed government treachery, he has awakened a giant.

The giant is a public that has had enough of violations of the Constitution and lies to cover them up.

The giant is fed up with menial politicians and their media allies demonizing the messenger because his message embarrasses the government by revealing that it is unworthy of caring for the Constitution.

Think about that: The very people in whose hands we have reposed the Constitution for preservation, protection, defense and enforcement have subverted it.

Snowden spoke the truth. Knowing what would likely befall him for his truthful revelations and making them nevertheless was an act of heroism and patriotism.

Thomas Paine once reminded the Framers that the highest duty of a patriot is to protect his countrymen from their government. We need patriots to do that now more than ever.





headline: A nation can be a democracy and still be a mortal enemy of the US
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


America need not be ambivalent about our continuing support for the Egyptian military after their overthrow of Mohammed Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood.The democratic election of Morsi should never have guaranteed U.S. cooperation.

Even the violence that has followed the removal of Mohammed Morsi should not end our support, though we should do the most we possibly can to argue against that violence and for humane treatment of all Egyptians.

The Muslim Brotherhood remains committed to establishing a Caliphate—an Islamic religious government under a single leader—from Spain to Indonesia. The leader of the Brotherhood, Muhammed Badi, has called for the destruction of Israel and predicted the demise of the United States.

Whether or not a majority of Egyptians, or even 90 percent of them, voted for the Muslim Brotherhood shouldn’t have earned our respect for that body.  

As Bill Siegel, author of "The Control Factor: Our Struggle to See the True Threat"has pointed out, we should take our enemies at their word, not escape into denial. He makes good psychological sense.

Whether or not a majority of Egyptians, or even 90 percent of them, voted for the Muslim Brotherhood shouldn’t have earned our respect for that body.

In fact, the higher the percentage vote for a group that wants Jews and Americans dead, the clearer that the country is hostile toward us and our allies and a source of peril to both.

Thus, the fact that Morsi was elected should have galvanized, not tempered, our will to make sure he did not keep his hold on power.

A nation can be a democracy—allowing citizens to vote—and still be a mortal enemy of America.And when that is the case, America should exercise every available and rational option to express its opposition to that government continuing in power.

Funding a nation’s military after it removes such a hostile political party from authority is a clear and obvious, not paradoxical, path.

In 1932, Adolf Hitler garnered 37 percent of the vote in a runoff election for President of Germany and was ultimately appointed Chancellor by Field Marshall Hindenburg (who had received a majority of the vote). Hitler’s rise to power within a democracy should not have won any hearts in America, or led to any reluctance to destabilize his government, even if he had won 97 percent of the vote.

There is nothing counterintuitive about being American and being glad a democracy opposed to the existence of Israel and hopeful that the United States will cease to exist has been toppled.And withholding aid from the military forces that achieved that end would be irrational.

I am as much a surgeon as I am a psychiatrist when it comes to world affairs.Cancer is cancer, and I like clean margins.

To the extent that a democratically elected government supports the notion of a single religion (in this case, Islam) governing a nation’s affairs, to the extent that that duly elected government is wildly expansionist, to the extent that that group wants to vacate peace treaties (as the Muslim Brotherhood would vacate the Camp David Accords) and to the extent that that group hates America, I want that group out of business, permanently.

And the folks who help put them out of business—while they should not be inhumane, lest they lose their moral (which, yes, trumps democratic) authority—have my symbolic vote.





headline: What liberal media won't tell you -- blacks benefit most from Stand Your Ground laws
byline: By Sherwin Lott, John Lott


Stand Your Ground laws have become a racial issue in the aftermath of the not guilty . President Obama and Attorney General Holder have weighed in, linking race and these laws.

On ABC News' "This Week," radio talk show host Travis Smiley declared what many think: "It appears to me, and I think many other persons in this country that you can in fact stand your ground unless you are a black man."

And they seem to have some evidence of this, now that the Tampa Bay Times has reviewed Florida's court cases to find “defendants claiming ‘stand your ground’ are more likely to prevail if the victim is black.”

In the wake of the not guilty verdict in the George Zimmerman trial musician Stevie Wonder's boycott of Florida until law is "abolished" has been joined over the last few days by Harry Belafonte and Chaka Khan.

Poor blacks who live in high crime urban areas are not only the most likely victims of crime, they are also the ones who benefit the most from Stand Your Ground laws.

Meanwhile, the U.S. Civil Rights Commission has launched its own investigation on Stand Your Ground laws and the Senate Judiciary committee recently announced its plan to hold hearings in September.

But the debate has everything backwards over who benefits from the law. Poor blacks who live in high crime urban areas are not only the most likely victims of crime, they are also the ones who benefit the most from Stand Your Ground laws. It makes it easier for them to protect themselves when the police can't be there fast enough. Rules that make self-defense more difficult would impact blacks the most.

Blacks may make up just 16.6 percent of Florida's population, but they account for over 31 percent of the state's defendants invoking a Stand Your Ground defense. Black defendants who invoke this statute to justify their actions are acquitted 8 percent more frequently than whites who use that same defense.

Prior to "Stand Your Ground," citizens had to retreat as far as possible and then announce to the criminal that they were going to shoot. The "Stand Your Ground" law drops the original requirement to retreat. But lethal force is still only justified when a reasonable person would believe that an attacker intends to inflict serious bodily harm or death. The law doesn't protect anyone who provokes a confrontation.

Apparently forgotten are the reasons that "Stand Your Ground" laws exist. Delays in letting people defend themselves sometimes prevented people from doing so. Trying to define an "appropriate retreat" adds confusion. Prosecutors have sometimes abusively claimed that people who defended themselves could have retreated even farther.

Despite the ruckus over the law after the George Zimmerman acquittal, his defense team never raised the "Stand Your Ground" law. Obviously, if Zimmerman was on his back and Trayvon Martin was holding him down (as the forensic and eyewitness evidence indicates), Zimmerman had no option to retreat. So the law was completely irrelevant.

Those who claim racism as an element of Stand Your Ground laws point to data compiled by the Tampa Bay Tribune. The newspaper examined 112 cases where people charged with murder relied on Florida's Stand Your Ground law, starting with the first cases filed in 2006 up until a week ago. Their "shocking" finding: 71 percent of those who killed an African-American man or woman faced no penalty compared to 59 percent of those who killed a white person

Yet, explosive claims of racism require more proof than that.

For example, just because two people are charged with murder doesn't mean the two cases are identical.

Using the Tribune data, blacks killed in these confrontations were 13 percentage points more likely to be armed than the whites who were killed, thus making it more plausible that their killers reasonably believed that they had little choice but to kill their attacker. By a 43 to 16 percent margin, the black men and women who were killed were also more often committing a crime.

Further, there were also more cases with a witness around when a black was killed (69 to 62 percent).

Besides information on the victim's and defendant's race and gender, the Tampa Bay Tribune collected a lot of other useful information on the cases: they looked at whether there were witnesses, whether the victim initiated the confrontation, whether the victim was armed, whether the defendant was on his own property when the shooting occurred, whether there was physical evidence, whether the defendant pursued the victim, and the type of case (was it a drug deal gone bad, home invasion, etc.).

Surprisingly, the Tribune never examined if the data they collected might explain the different conviction rates.

Doing so actually reverses their claim. Everything else equal, in cases with only one person killed, killing a black person, rather than a white person, increases the defendant's odds of being convicted, though the result is not statistically significant. If you also include multiple murder cases, killing a black person increases the chances of conviction even more.

These regressions also show that white defendants are more likely to be convicted than black defendants, and both effects are significantly greater than for Hispanics.

Whether the person killed initiated the confrontation and having an eyewitness were the most important factors in determining whether there was a conviction.

We've heard it over and over: Stand Your Ground gave Zimmerman the confidence to leave his car, and if only Zimmerman had stayed in his car, this tragedy would have been prevented.

Put aside that Zimmerman got out of his car because the operator asked where Martin was. Do we really want to live in a country where poor people in high crime urban areas hunker down, afraid to leave their homes?

The third edition of the book, "More Guns, Less Crime," written by one of the authors here, is the first published peer-reviewed study examining laws that don't require victims retreat as far a possible and I found that there were benefits in terms of lower crime rates.

Democrats make much of how they care about poor people. Yet, the taxes and fees they impose on gun ownership by law-abiding citizens say otherwise.

In Democratically-controlled Washington, D.C., it costs $534 to register and license a handgun.

With New York's new background checks to buy ammunition, a fee averaging $85 is tacked on to each purchase of bullets.

This spring when Republicans in Colorado offered an amendment to exempt those below the poverty level from having to pay the new fee to obtain a gun, it was Democrats who voted in lockstep to defeat it.

Democrats want poor minorities votes, but they just don’t want them to be able to defend themselves.



Sherwin Lott is a junior at Johns Hopkins University.





headline: Don't let 'Superman' tell you how to survive a deadly tornado
byline: By Janice Dean


My husband and I went to see the new Superman movie over the weekend “The Man of Steel.” We haven’t been to a movie in months together, so it was a fun outing.Unfortunately, for me, the movie was a HUGE let down on so many levels.

This new “Man of Steel” was dark, loud, boring and felt like an overblown video game.

The non-stop fighting scenes and constant loud explosions tried to compensate for an otherwise dull storyline. They could’ve taken an hour of the hyper active smash 'em bang up scenes and left them on the cutting room floor.

Henry Cavill is handsome, but one dimensional and Amy Adams as Lois Lane was as stiff as a card board cutout.

I was shocked and disappointed to see one of the main story lines having to do with tornadoes executed so poorly.

And because I do weather as a profession, I was shocked and disappointed to see one of the main story lines having to do with tornadoes executed so poorly.

Half way through the movie in a pivotal flashback, Clark and his family experience a huge, and monstrous tornado as they are driving somewhere (along with dozens of other motorists).

This scene apparently takes place in the late '90s so it wasn’t like there wasn’t radar technology, or weather people to give advanced forecasts or ways to be warned about potential devastating tornadoes in the area. This twister comes out of nowhere as people in their cars are driving down the highway. As the tornado tears across the highway, Clark Kent’s father (played by Kevin Costner) keeps telling his family (and everyone else) to get under the highway overpass! He says this several times – and people flee their vehicles and head for the overpass.

Because we’ve had several strong and deadly tornadoes this year – I was particularly concerned by this WRONG advice. Seeing shelter under an overpass actually puts you at a GREATER risk of danger by flying debris from the winds. Here’s what the NOAA website says:

“Many people mistakenly think that a highway overpass provides safety from a tornado. In reality, an overpass may be one of the worst places to seek shelter from a tornado. Seeking shelter under an overpass puts you at greater risk of being killed or seriously injured by flying debris from the powerful tornadic winds and can also block the road for emergency vehicles.”

The best advice is to “seek shelter in a sturdy, well constructed building, or by lying flat in a ditch, ravine or below grade culvert” And by all means, do not try to outrun a tornado in a car.

Warner Brothers released a statement that the movie is a “work of fiction and events depicted in the movie are not intended, nor should they be seen to offer any emergency preparedness advice. We remain mindful of the recent tornado tragedy in Oklahoma and extend our sympathies to the families involved.”

Meanwhile, "Man of Steel" director Zack Snyder told the Associated Press that there was no discussion about eliminating the key scenes of tornado violence.

Since Warner Brothers spent so much time and effort (and tens of millions of dollars) to blow stuff up – and make their special effects so realistic, could they not have spent a few minutes researching how to escape a tornado?

The saddest part is that many people lost their lives to a very similar situation last month. Perhaps instead of giving bad advice, the Superman writers could’ve used the opportunity as a “teachable moment” on how to react during a dangerous and potentially deadly weather event.





headline: What Weiner’s sexting scandal tells us about young women today
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Anthony Weiner obviously has problems that make him unfit to govern, but his addictive sexting behavior tells us at least as much about changes in gender roles—particularly the new eagerness of women to be overtly, graphically sexual—as it does about him. 

Anthony Weiner assaulted no one; he had plenty of playmates happy to receive photographs of his private parts, flirt with Carlos Danger and gratify him and themselves, sexually.

Today’s women are, by the many millions, no different from men in their sexual appetites or lack of demureness. That’s why Nancy Pelosi’s statement that Anthony Weiner’s behavior was offensive to women actually exposes a fault line between women of her age and women younger than, say, 30: A very significant percentage of young women today are not offended by being sent overt, intensely erotic material and respond in kind.

Some gender roles developed because of psychological facts, not in spite of them.  And when feminists urged and urge that we throw out all of them, they do a disservice to females and to the truth.

The sexual liberation of women has liberated them to be just like men—who, whether anyone likes it or not, often enjoy sex outside of emotionally-connected, longstanding relationships.

This was an actual goal of feminists, and they began achieving it by (for example) publishing headlines on the cover of Cosmopolitan magazine urging women to share their best one-night stands, their bad-girl behavior and their techniques for achieving orgasm. 

The wide dissemination of oral contraceptives furthered it, too. So has the abortion movement. And so has the military—by moving to put women on the front lines, in combat roles.

Women bought the feminist argument hook, line and sinker. The idea that they might actually want to preserve the role of resistor in the circuitry of sex, given the possibility that they might be more vulnerable emotionally and might be more vulnerable physically, was drummed out by those who argued, and continue to argue, that gender has no meaning—because males and females aren’t just equal; they’re no different from one another.

The result is runaway sexual circuitry, fueled by the depersonalizing forces of the Internet, in general, and Facebook, Twitter and Tumblr, in particular. 

From my perch as a psychiatrist talking to thousands of people a year, I can tell you that the average young woman no longer balks at sexting, watching pornography or being the aggressor sexually in a relationship. 

Millions of female teenagers have heard the phrase “friends with benefits” and aren’t reluctant to have sex as a pact of mutual physical fulfillment, with no strings attached.

But I will tell you that, from what I hear in my office, the girls actually feel a whole lot worse about it, in their hearts, than the boys. Because, you see, girls and boys, are not the same. 

Some gender roles developed because of psychological facts, not in spite of them. And when feminists urged and urge that we throw out all of them, they do a disservice to females and to the truth.

So, don’t think for a minute that the women who welcomed Anthony Weiner’s sexual energy were being used by him, first or foremost. They were used by the Women’s Movement long before he ever hit “send.”





headline: A revolutionary idea -- enough already with the royal baby
byline: By Dan Gainor


“The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States.”

-- Declaration of Independence, July 4, 1776

Dear American Media:

It’s great that the royal couple is about to have a baby. We share in their joy – constantly – because you are covering the story nonstop.

What next? A baby countdown clock?

Amidst the hoopla, you’ve forgotten something that’s kind of important. We rebelled against the royals a couple hundred years ago.(See attachment.)You must have heard about it. It was in all the papers.

Perhaps a refresher course is in order for those of you who didn't pay attention in school or rely on that J-school degree.

This is America. We spent a lot of time telling off the royals, not kissing up to them.

The king systematically took away our rights as citizens until we fought back. Fifty-six members of the Continental Congress signed the Declaration of Independence that complained of “despotism.”

“The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States,” it reads.

The document is filled with the king’s offenses from “imposing Taxes on us without our Consent” to abolishing laws and cutting off trade. “He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people,” goes another charge. He was accused of violence “scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.”

In short, the king was not a nice guy. We fought a long war and won our freedom. A couple decades later, we fought another war with Britain where they burned Washington, D.C. Hardly the kind of thing guests do when they want to be invited back.

Despite all that, we eventually became friends and firm allies. As an avowed Anglophile, I’m happy to celebrate most things British – except the food, which even the English don’t especially celebrate.

But we need to draw the line at royalty. This is America. We spent a lot of time telling off the royals, not kissing up to them. The famed Fighting 69theven refused to march in parade when the Prince of Wales came to visit back in 1861. That’s the American way.

Somewhere some network exec is reading this and saying one word: “Ratings.” That’s why we get CBS’s Elizabeth Palmer telling us “the birth of this baby will be big news.”

In Britain, sure. In America? Snore.

NBC has enjoyed the hype, as well, calling the story “The Great Kate Wait” and “Great Expectations.”

Fox News isn't immune from the allure of the royal baby, either. "America's Newsroom" co-host Martha MacCallum has been anchoring from London this week and reporting on the baby watch, too. Meanwhile, FNC's Shepard Smith admitted Wednesday that he doesn’t give a rat’s butt” about the baby. How's that for Fair Balanced coverage?

Let’s put that in perspective. According to Nexis, there were more mentions of Kate Middleton’s pregnancy on ABC, CBS and NBC in the last year than mentions of my Super Bowl winning Baltimore Ravens (from the city that beat the British in 1814) and the World Series winning San Francisco Giants.

Did network execs forget that 108 million people watched the Super Bowl? That’s 45 million more than the population of the United Kingdom. Surely, they remember that “we love baseball, hot dogs, apple pie and Chevrolet?”

Even “The Daily Show” chimed in, with temp host John Oliver saying, “Kate Middleton about to give birth to the greatest baby in the history of civilization.”

That’s OK, it was a joke and he’s British, so he’s exempt. Sadly, that humorous hype wasn’t much different from the news coverage.

Those news execs would argue that American women, we are told, are raised from birth to want to be princesses. They get bombarded by images of Disney princesses and allegedly every woman wants to be just like them.

A quick look at what happened to many of the Disney actresses should end that argument. Think Britney Spears, Miley Cyrus and Lindsay Lohan. ‘Nuff said.

Even “Princess Diaries” star Anne Hathaway has had her wardrobe malfunction and sex scenes. Given the way Hollywood is, some of the animated princesses probably went on to do drugs and porn.

Besides, who needs foreign princesses when we have our own right here? Sure, Kate is smart, cute, pretty and classy, but ours are home-grown. We’ve got Hollywood royalty – the Kardashians, Beyonce, and more. They even name their kids truly ridiculous names like North West and Blue Ivy. How’s that for news value?

If none of that sways you, then think of the Founding Fathers. They were the men who took the risks and said “we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor.” They wouldn’t find such adoration of royalty to be revolutionary. They’d probably call it revolting.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Is America really a free country?
byline: By John Stossel


People say America is a free country. But what if you want to drink, have a cigarette or make a bet? Government often says “no” to protect us from ourselves.

It’s as if the government is still run by the Puritans who settled this land four centuries ago. They said pleasure and luxury are sinful.

Today’s government has a better argument when it seeks to restrict activities that might harm others, but I notice that even then, it often focuses more on things that upset modern-day Puritans.

If we banned every activity that had the potential to become addictive, we’d have to ban fatty foods, sex, alcohol and investing in the stock market.

Drinking and driving can be fatal. But government data show that sleeplessness and driving are just as deadly. Having kids in the back seat, looking at GPS map instructions, fiddling with the radio and eating while driving are often deadly, too.

But sleeplessness doesn’t seem as decadent and irresponsible as drinking. Nor is there an easy way for police to test for such discretions -- no breathalyzer test for excessive radio tuning. 

Why is the DUI test all about alcohol level, rather than behavior? Government keeps lowering legal blood-alcohol levels -- recently from .10 to .08 -- and now they want to lower it to .05. But some people are good drivers even after a drink or two. It would be better to punish people for “reckless” driving.

Alcohol-related driving deaths are down. Groups like MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Driving) credit tougher DUI laws, but it’s not clear that they are right.

Maybe people are simply more aware of the dangers, thanks to publicity from groups like MADD. Safer car designs helped, too. Non-alcohol-related driving deaths are also down.

Statistics that some cite to claim alcohol is the cause of a third of highway accidents are misleading. That just means that a third of the people had alcohol in their systems; it doesn’t necessarily mean alcohol caused the accident.

I don’t suggest that drinking and driving is safe or smart. But the puritanical obsession with drinking distracts us from other ways we could make driving safer.

At least DUI laws seek to protect people from others. But government puritans go well beyond that, banning activities that harm only the individual engaged in them -- like gambling.

Polls show 70 percent of you support the current ban on Internet gambling.

Why? It’s true, for some people, gambling becomes addictive. Some wreck their lives. But for most people, gambling is entertainment, practice in using strategy and an excuse to socialize. A little risk is fun. And the laws don’t stop the activity. They drive it underground, where it’s run by criminals.

If we banned every activity that had the potential to become addictive, we’d have to ban fatty foods, sex, alcohol and investing in the stock market. Life means risk.

Sometimes puritans want to ban things without any evidence that the activity is harmful. After every mass shooting, someone wants to tax, or ban, violent video games.

Yet violent offenses by youth fell by more than half over the past two decades, while video game sales doubled. If there’s a causal relationship, maybe playing video games prevents kids from behaving violently.

Japan spends much more on violent video games than the U.S., but its crime rate is much lower. Maybe the Japanese get it out of their system through make-believe? I don’t know. But I do know that a lack of evidence rarely stops the puritans.

The puritanical panics of today may look silly someday. In the 1950s, a psychiatrist testified that Superman comic books inspire juvenile delinquency.

After hearing about those moral panics, you might feel like relaxing with a cold beer. But don’t try buying one from a convenience store in Indiana. The state requires that the beer be sold warm.

In theory, warm beer will discourage drinking on the road.

I doubt that such laws help. Perhaps puritanical laws don’t have to make sense. They just have to leave us feeling righteous because we’ve done something to crack down on bad behavior.





headline: We never should have witnessed a Zimmerman trial
byline: By John Lott


The George Zimmerman case should never have been brought. Saturday night after the “not guilty” verdict was delivered, State Attorney Angela Corey justified bringing the case “to put the facts out there.” But criminal cases should never be brought simply to put the facts before the public.

No one should be charged with a crime unless prosecutors themselves really believe that the person committed a crime.

Yet, the prosecution and their own experts’ language consistently showed a lack of certainty. Prosecutors aren’t supposed to bring cases where the best they can say is that something might “possibly” have happened or that there was a “chance” that it did.

Whether it's George Zimmerman or John Doe, no one should be charged with a crime unless prosecutors really believe that the person committed a crime.

Usually defense attorneys are the ones trying to get prosecution witnesses to concede that alternative explanations might be possible. In the Zimmerman trial, even the prosecution couldn’t get definite statements out of their own witnesses.

By the end of the trial, with the prosecution conceding that Travyon Martin was likely on top of Zimmerman, prosecutors were forced to speculate that possibly Martin was about to get off of Zimmerman when he was shot. That, by itself, completely undermined the prosecution's claim that Martin was the one calling for help.

The case was so weak that the local Sanford District Attorney refused to bring charges against Zimmerman. That is why, on the orders of the governor, an outside District Attorney, Angela Corey, had to be brought in to handle it.

Sanford Police Chief Bill Lee was fired because he also refused to charge Zimmerman with a crime.

Even the lead detective on the case, Christopher Serino, told the jury he believed Zimmerman's version of the events.

Many people jumped to conclusions without knowing the facts. Even before they could read the police reports, many conservative commentators claimed early on that Zimmerman had acted improperly (Mona Charen, Rich Lowry, Heather Mac Donald, Robert VerBruggen, and Gregory Kane).

Comments by President Obama, Al Sharpton, and others surely stirred up the racial aspects of the case and appear to have led some blacks across the country to attack whites to avenge Trayvon Martin (e.g., Gainesville, Florida; Oak Park, Illinois; Mobile, Alabama; Toledo, Ohio; Grand Rapids, Michigan; and Norfolk, Virginia).

The media also bears a real responsibility for sensationalism. After all, most people can’t spend their days reading police reports or listening to trials. But in Zimmerman’s case, "NBC Nightly News" and the "Today Show" went so far as doctoring tapes of Zimmerman’s 911 call to make it look as if he was fixated on Trayvon Martin’s race.

Even late in the trial, media coverage still showed pictures of a much younger 12-year-old Martin continually reinforcing the image in many minds that Zimmerman had shot a young child, not a six-foot, 17-year-old football player.

Many readers might be surprised to learn that 17-year-olds are almost 50 percent more likely to commit murders than 28-year-olds such as Zimmerman.

Other parts of the prosecution's case could only be described as an attempt to distract jurors. For example, much was made of the class Zimmerman took at Seminole State College that taught by Professor Alexis Carter.

The key was, supposedly, that Zimmerman really understood Florida’s “Stand Your Ground” law. Prosecutor Richard Mantei told the court that Zimmerman's legal studies would help jurors understand his "state of mind" and "ambitions and frustrations" before the shooting.

One could debate about whether Zimmerman remembered the part of that lecture from the class. Nevertheless, it was really completely besides the point for the same reason that the defense never referenced the law: with Zimmerman on his back and Trayvon Martin holding him down, he had no option to retreat.

None of the testimony ever explained why the “Stand Your Ground” law was even relevant to Zimmerman’s actions.

The prosecutors’ biggest problem was that they had to do more than convince jurors that their version of events was “likely,” and they never come close to doing that.

Instead, they had to show that their claims about Zimmerman were true beyond a “reasonable doubt.” To put it differently, to say something is “likely” just means that there is over a 50 percent chance it is true. To say something is beyond a reasonable doubt means that it is much closer to 100 percent.

This case should never have been brought by prosecutors, but they let politics influence their decision.





headline: Is your child getting a 'dead-end' diploma?
byline: By Brian Brenberg, Jared Pincin


More young people than ever will receive a college diploma this year, and an alarming number will enter the ‘real world’ without a job.

The unemployment rate for college graduates is higher today than it was five years ago during the darkest days of the Great Recession. And, it’s unlikely to get much better in the coming years if the United States continues to pursue policies that make landing a job or starting a business more difficult.

The surge in unemployment among recent college graduates is part of a larger trend of youth unemployment in the U.S.

The unemployment rate for those ages 20-24 is more than 13 percent—up from just below 10 percent when the recession started—and significantly higher than the overall unemployment rate of 7.5 percent.

Unfortunately, this trend is poised to continue in the U.S. thanks to several recent policies and proposals.

Handing out more diplomas won't do much good if our newly minted graduates can't find a way to use them.

Begin with the employer mandate in the Affordable Care Act, which requires small businesses with 50 or more full-time employees to offer health insurance to workers, or pay a per-employee penalty.

Several of the law’s rules have yet to be written, leaving employers unsure about what lies ahead in terms of requirements and costs. Many businesses are unclear about whether their existing insurance plans will qualify and how much their premiums will change.

According to the Federal Reserve, these uncertainties are leading businesses to lay-off workers and curtail hiring. Bad news for college grads entering the job market.

Recent proposals to raise the minimum wage to $9 per hour would also dampen job opportunities for recent college graduates. In fact, since 2002 the number of college graduates earning the minimum wage has increased by 70 percent.

The boost in income may help those who already have minimum wage jobs, but raising the cost of hiring could discourage employers from taking risks on younger, inexperienced workers—even those with a college degree who are trying to build a resume.

Occupational licensing laws are another barrier to those trying to enter the workforce. More than 1,100 jobs across the country from dieticians and athletic trainers to interior designers and florists require a license in at least one state.

The burden of occupational licensing laws includes annual fees, tuition for coursework, and often hundreds of hours of classroom time. These demands are particularly heavy for those with little savings and a lot of debt.

Do you know any college students in that boat? 

Countries that see the most job growth—for young and old alike—limit labor restrictions like these and give entrepreneurs and business owners freedom to pursue new opportunities with whomever they want, at whatever terms they find mutually agreeable.

Data from the Heritage Foundation’s 2013 Index of Economic Freedom and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) reveals a strong relationship between economic freedom levels and youth employment: the more economic freedom, the more job opportunities available.

In other words, it’s easier for young people to find work in countries that leave more economic decisions in the hands of private individuals and businesses.

This gap in employment will have long-term repercussions for the Millennial generation. Having a job signals employability and is crucial for acquiring skills to succeed in today’s world of rapid technological change.

Furthermore, labor market research shows the longer a person is unemployed, the more difficult it is to find work, and absence from the labor market can have a long-term negative effect on future earning potential.

Lasting prosperity requires a contribution from every generation. Younger workers often make up for a lack of experience with an abundance of creativity, energy, and tolerance for risk. But they need the freedom to test ideas, learn from their successes and failures, and move onto something new.

We're jeopardizing their futures and ours through policies that limit their job opportunities.

Handing out more diplomas won't do much good if our newly minted graduates can't find a way to use them. 



Brian Brenberg is an assistant professor of economics at The King’s College in New York City.





headline: Obama declares a War on Coal
byline: By Phil Kerpen


So much for the denials. An administration that throughout its 2012 election campaign denied it was waging a War on Coal has now come out and publicly declared its intention to shut down coal-fired power plants – putting hundreds of thousands of Americans out of work and sending electricity prices skyrocketing.

This is not what the American people voted for.

Responding to a White House petition to end the War on Coal, the administration said: “The President has made clear that he understands that coal has played a critical role in our country’s energy portfolio for decades and will continue to be an important source of energy in the future.”

Sycophantic liberal media outlets (like The Nation and the Associated Press) went further, repeatedly claiming that the War on Coal was a myth. The Obama campaign even ran a TV ad in Ohio claiming that Mitt Romney would be bad for coal – and trotted out former Democratic Gov. Ted Strickland to deny there was a war on coal and echo the attacks on Romney.

Yet today Obama political consultant David Plouffe took to Twitter to bang his chest: “Today's climate announcement underscores that elections matter greatly” – as if Obama had campaigned on shutting down coal plants instead of on denying his intention to do so.

Such denials are no longer necessary. Today a top Obama global warming adviser told The New York Times the denials were just election-year politics. Daniel Schrag said: “Politically, the White House is hesitant to say they’re having a war on coal. On the other hand, a war on coal is exactly what’s needed.”

And Obama delivered. It’s right there on page 19 of his Climate Action Plan: “Going forward, we will promote fuel-switching from coal to gas for electricity production.”

Indeed, Obama made clear in his speech that he intends to impose regulations on existing coal plants that can only be met through carbon capture and storage (technology that doesn’t exist on a commercial scale), switching to natural gas, or shutting down completely.

Coal still produces 37 percent of U.S. electricity. A Heritage Foundation analysis found that implementing Obama’s proposed regulation on existing coal plants would destroy more than 500,000 jobs, slash the income of a typical family of four more than $1,400 a year, and increase electricity prices at least 20 percent. Price spikes could be much higher in states that depend heavily on coal-fired power plants, especially in the Midwest. President Obama once famously explained that he intended to make electricity prices “necessarily skyrocket.”

Obama intends to fight his War on Coal by issuing a Presidential Memorandum to the EPA to issue regulations under the 1970 Clean Air Act. This is despite the fact that the law’s principal author, Democrat John Dingell of Michigan, famously said: “This is not what was intended by the Congress and by those of us who wrote the Clean Air Act. We are beginning to look at a wonderfully complex world, which has the potential for shutting down or slowing down virtually all industry and all economic activity and growth.”

Regulating existing coal plants also has the additional legal problem of arguably being pre-empted by last year’s set of War on Coal regulations under a different section of the act.

And there is zero global warming benefit to go with all the economic costs, because even if all United States greenhouse gas emissions were shut down to zero tomorrow, the rest of the world would keep on puffing. Paul Knappenberger recently calculated, based on standard assumptions, that getting to zero emissions in the U.S. immediately would only reduce global average temperatures an imperceptible 0.08 degrees Celsius by 2050. Moreover, the rest of the world would replace all U.S. emissions within seven years.

So it’s all pain and no gain. By legally dubious means. To accomplish the opposite of what Obama promised on the campaign trail. Congress should take exception to being circumvented and step in to stop Obama’s (now-declared) War on Coal.

You can urge them to do so through the www.WarOnCoal.com action page.







headline: Has the prosecution made a good case against George Zimmerman?
byline: By Tamara Holder


Eight days into its presentation the prosecution in the George Zimmerman second degree murder trial signaled that it planned to finish its case by the end of the day.

Prosecutors did not rest but their midday statement signaled that they were essentially done showing the jury all of their evidence and witnesses.

Keep in mind that all witnesses (more than 30 of them) that have testified thus far are just the witnesses for the prosecution.

In conversations with friends and family, and judging by comments on social media, there seems to be a consensus that the majority of the state’s witnesses were not helpful to the prosecution’s case against Zimmerman. In some instances, it appears that the witnesses may have even helped the defense.

There seems to be a consensus that the majority of the state’s witnesses in the Trayvon Martin case were not helpful to the prosecution’s case against Zimmerman.

Rachel Jeantel, Martin’s close friend, testified for two days. She evoked great public response -- primarily because of her negative courtroom demeanor.

But in the eight hours she spent on the stand, the jury learned little from Jeantal other than that she was the last person to talk to Martin on the phone and that she did not witness the incident. Jeantel’s testimony certainly did not give a big boost to the prosecution.

The lead Sanford Florida Police Detective Christopher Serino, testified that during his investigation Zimmerman told him that Martin attacked him, and that he believed Zimmerman was telling him the truth.

The following morning, Judge Debra Nelson instructed the jurors to disregard the portion of Serino's testimony where he revealed that he found Zimmerman’s story to be credible. (A witness (Serino) cannot testify to the credibility of another. Rather, it is a jury’s job to assess credibility of the witnesses and evidence.)

But bear in mind that the jury still heard Serino’s opinion, regardless of the judge’s ruling the following day.

Mark Osterman testified that Zimmerman is “the best friend I ever had.” He said that his friend essentially told him the same version of events that Zimmerman told to police.

Yes, Osterman once wrote a book about shooting but why the prosecution would choose to use the defendant’s best friend as its witness is bizarre (unless Osterman was going to testify that Zimmerman told him a completely different story.)

The prosecution also played a previously-televised interview of Zimmerman with Fox News anchor Sean Hannity.

Fox News producer Sarafin Gomez, who has been inside of the courtroom, stated that the jury was very “fixed” on the interview in which Zimmerman stated he had no regrets about what happened with Martin because it was “God’s plan.”

Of course, if Zimmerman takes the stand, the Hannity interview can be used to impeach him but for the prosecution’s purposes, playing the interview for the jury revealed nothing incriminating except for an inconsistency here and there.

Neighbor Selma Mora testified that she only saw one man on top of another. Period. Zimmerman was the aggressor.

Her testimony can support Zimmerman’s claim that he and Martin were on the ground but it certainly does not help the prosecution prove that Zimmerman is guilty of murder or was not acting in self defense.

Medical examiner Dr. Valerie Rao testified that Zimmerman had “minor” and “very insignificant” head injuries. But self-defense does not require that Zimmerman have a broken skull and swollen brain.

Dr. Rao proved that, regardless of the severity of the wounds, Zimmerman’s scalp was wounded.

Captain Alexis Carter, a member of the military JAG Corps, taught a Criminal Litigation course at Seminole State College. He was Zimmerman’s teacher. Carter testified that Zimmerman received an A grade in his Criminal Litigation class.

He even said “Hi, George” to Zimmerman when he entered the courtroom. A prosecution witness’ friendly exchange with the defendant is certainly not helpful.

Carter stated that Zimmerman learned about Florida's “Stand your Ground” law in his class, whereas Zimmerman told Sean Hannity that he did not know about the law. Regardless of this inconsistency, Carter showed that Zimmerman was a good and likable student.

Martin is not alive to tell his side of the story. We will never hear his version of events.

At this point, however, the prosecution appears to be making a very poor case against Zimmerman. It has so far failed to show, through its witnesses and evidence, that he is guilty of Second Degree Murder beyond a reasonable doubt.





headline: 'Crackers,' a 'teenage mammy' -- the sorry truth about race and Zimmerman trial
byline: By Juan Williams


"White Hispanics," "Creepy-Ass Crackers," "Teenage Mammies," and "Suspicious A--holes who always get away" -- that is the vernacular of the George Zimmerman trial.

George Zimmerman faces life in jail as a jury considers second-degree murder charges against him for killing 17-year-old Trayvon Martin. But thanks to the media he is already sentenced to life in the American public's mind as a racist.

NBC edited a tape of Zimmerman’s call to police as he was following Martin to make him appear to be focused on Martin’s race.

The New York Times has referred to him in unique racial terms as a “white Hispanic." The terminology was necessary to have the story fit into a well-worn news narrative throughout American history from the Scottsboro Boys to Emmett Till to Rodney King – the black victim of white racism. Hispanic people can be as racist as black or white people in a country with a deep history of racism. But, apparently for the Times, Zimmerman's whiteness was important. It fit their good versus evil tale of a white racist killing an innocent black man.

The media is clearly guilty of playing on the most primitive racial divisions in our society to fuel racial animosity and boost ratings.

In June, before the trial started, a CNN poll asked Americans if they believed the murder charges against Zimmerman were true or false. Without any courtroom testimony or evidence, but based on the racially charged media coverage, 62 percent of Americans said the charges were “probably true” or “definitely true.”

My bet is that poll would have different results today. The trial has failed to prove Zimmerman acted with a “depraved mind” – as required for a second-degree murder conviction – or even with a racist mind. He certainly killed Martin. And the jury may decide he is guilty of second-degree murder or manslaughter. But what we heard in the courtroom fits with an FBI report that found race was not a factor in Martin’s shooting death.

The strong public judgment of Zimmerman’s guilt in the poll reflected a racially weighted media telling of the story. Photos of a bloodied Zimmerman after the incident, Zimmerman’s claim of self-defense and the police decision not to charge Zimmerman all got a dismissive glance from the press and contributed to public assumptions about Zimmerman before the trial. 

Liberal and conservative news TV and radio have played to the racial theme, too. The left, notably Rev. Al Sharpton, have made the case a crusade for racial justice. The right-wing media, especially talk radio, has responded by making Zimmerman a hero. In fact, Zimmerman’s lawyer, Mark O’Mara, created an online site that attracted more than $145,000 from people who somehow made Zimmerman into their champion, possibly their great white hero.

The national focus on race in this case hit a high point when Rachel Jeantel, a 19-year-old student, testified that she spoke with Martin just before he was killed. Jeantel, Martin’s friend, told the court that Martin complained that a “man was just watching him.” And Martin described this man, Jeantel said, as a “creepy, white, excuse my language, cracker --- creepy-ass cracker.”

Jeantel’s testimony set off a stupid debate, requiring total ignorance of slavery and legal segregation, about the equivalence of blacks using “cracker” to describe whites, versus whites using the word “nigger” to describe blacks.

And Jeantel’s physical appearance, as a dark, heavyset young woman, speaking with a Southern dialect as she gave the lawyers a lot of attitude with her curt answers, contributed to the racial view of the case.

She became the “teenage mammy,” in the words of a sociology professor quoted in the New York Times, caricatured for “not being smart and using these racial slurs and not being the best witness.”

And now the media, especially some conservative talk radio outlets, are fixated on the possibility of race riots if Zimmerman is acquitted. Meanwhile, Twitter and other social media sites are full of threats from angry black people to kill Zimmerman if he is not held accountable by a jury for killing Martin.

Martin, the 17-year-old, is dead. But he has not escaped the racial slander attached to this case. Zimmerman’s backers note that Martin had smoked marijuana – as if that is unusual among American teenagers. They seem delighted to find online messages in which he took on a rapper, street-thug persona and posed as a tough guy.

These are all caricatures of two real people caught in a tragedy.

Zimmerman should have listened to the 911 emergency dispatch operator who told him to stop following Martin.

Why did he have a gun if he was simply part of a neighborhood watch program?

He had no basis to suspect Martin of any crime. So why does he describe Martin as “suspicious” to police?

Why does he apparently lump Martin with people he describes as “these a--holes, they always get away.”

Why didn’t Martin just walk away from Zimmerman?

But Martin is dead. He can’t speak for himself and get beyond the box of racial stereotypes the media built for him.

Zimmerman is alive. He has chosen not to speak at his trial, and although the prosecution played an interview he did with Fox News' Sean Hannity, it is still no match for skipping an ideal chance to tell his story when everyone is listening in the courtroom and on television.

Now, no matter what the verdict, he is going to carry his box of racial stereotypes around until his death. His identity will always be as a want-to-be cop who trailed a black kid who was not doing anything wrong, got in a fight with him, pulled out a gun and killed him.

Ultimately, it is the job of the media to give straight, objective coverage of any story.

Whatever the final verdict on Zimmerman, the media is clearly guilty of playing on the most primitive racial divisions in our society to fuel racial animosity and boost ratings.

There are no winners here.





headline: A tribute to hands-on dads
byline: By Janice Dean


Today is Father’s Day. 

There have been a lot of articles published about the role of the “Working Mom” these days, and how times are changing with women in the workplace. Now more than ever, Fathers have to step in as the primary caregiver to help raise healthy, well-adjusted children. Thankfully I married a man that has no problem filling that role when I work weekends or nights. Do I wish I was home more? Sure. But I see how wonderful Sean is with Matthew and Theodore, and am grateful every day that they have a hands-on Dad that they love and feel comforted by when Mom is not home.

I was looking for a Father’s Day card yesterday and was so mad seeing all the cards that were supposed to be “Funny” about “Dear old Dad” being lazy, forgetting to mow the lawn, drinking beer or passing gas. What an insult. Greeting card companies need to get with the program. Like Moms, Dads can do it all. And for those like my husband Sean, who sometimes has to sacrifice a few career opportunities to make sure they’re home to drive the kids to school or make lunches, change diapers, do laundry, make dinner and still have time to clean the kitchen after reading to the children and getting them to bed at night – I honor you. Not just on Father’s Day, but every day. I think I speak for all of us when I say I love you even more today than the day I became your wife.

To all the No. 1 Dads out there – Thank You for all that you do for us Moms and, more importantly, being a role model to our children so that they may be good parents too, someday.





headline: Don't call me a 'traitor' because I shrug at NSA phone surveillance program
byline: By John Stossel


Many libertarians, outraged by how our government spies on us, call me a “traitor” because I’m not very angry. I understand that the National Security Administration tracking patterns in our emails and phone calls could put us on a terrible, privacy-crushing slippery slope.

But we’re not there yet.

Some perspective:

We are less closely watched by government than citizens of other countries. There are about 3,000 government security cameras around New York City, but London has 500,000.

I hate to get bogged down in the surveillance debate when there are so many other ways that government clearly threatens our freedom and our finances, while accomplishing nothing.

Some people in London love that, believing that the extra surveillance deters crime and catches terrorists.

I thought government cameras helped identify the Boston Marathon bombers, but on my Fox Business show, Ginger McCall of the Electronic Privacy Information Center argued that those cameras provide an illusion of security at a nasty price.

“These cameras reveal very private information -- where you go, who you go there with,” she said. “They can record you going into the sex therapist's office, the gay bar, the abortion clinic, any number of places that you would probably not want other people to know that you’re going ... ”

She says that loss of privacy doesn’t even make us safer.

“It isn’t necessarily how we found the Boston Marathon bomber. There were a lot of things going on there ... eyewitnesses identifications, cameras that were not government-owned (often cellphones) and eventually the fingerprints of the older brother ... if the cameras were really successful, there would be no crime in London.”

But “no crime” is too much to demand. I’m convinced that widespread use of cameras is one reason crime is down in America. Some criminals are caught, and others deterred.

It does make a difference if cameras are controlled by a city government or a private department store. No store can lock me up. But I hate to get bogged down in the surveillance debate when there are so many other ways that government clearly threatens our freedom and our finances, while accomplishing nothing.

Thinking about the NSA revelation, I also thought about other things my government does that I really hate. Within a few hours, I had a list of 100 -- it was surprisingly easy.

I encourage you to start a list of your own. Here are just a few example of horrible, destructive government:

-- Government (federal and local) now employs 22 million Americans. That’s outrageous.
-- Government runs up a $17 trillion deficit and yet continues to throw our money at things like $100 million presidential trips, million-dollar bus stops and pork projects, as well as thousands of programs that don’t work.
-- It funds a drug war that causes crime and imprisons millions, disproportionately minorities. That’s horrible.
-- It spends your money on corporate welfare. And farm subsidies. And flood insurance that helps higher-income people like me build homes in risky spots.
-- Government keeps American Indians poor by smothering them with socialist central planning. It does this despite the fall of the Soviet Union and the obvious failure of socialism everywhere. That’s evil.
-- So are “too big to fail” bank bailouts. And other bailouts.
-- I’m furious that there are now 175,000 pages of federal law. No one understands all the laws, but they keep passing more. How dare they!

NSA spying seems less horrible than these other abuses, especially if data mining might prevent terrorism.

I suspect people are outraged by the NSA in part because new threats seem scarier than old, familiar ones. That’s a trick government itself exploits all the time: Each new drug, each new health threat, each new dictator is made to sound like the most horrible thing ever.

We should be wary of treating the new danger as if it’s the biggest danger.

I don’t suggest that we should be passive about data mining and surveillance. But we should not let the latest threat make us passive about the old ones, some of them much more clearly wrong.

What we already know about government is even scarier than what they know about us.





headline: 'Glee' should use Cory Monteith's death as a teaching moment
byline: By Jehmu Greene


He made us believe in "Glee" with "Don't Stop Believin" and for four glorious seasons, sang his way into our hearts. Cory Monteith, starring as Finn Hudson, was that guy. The one every girl falls in love with in high school. The one who lights up a room, fits in with all the different cliques, and is as vulnerable as he is strong.

Sadly, but not surprising, we now know he was also that other guy. A drug addict.

Unable to quit the deadly pull of heroin, even with the help of family and friends. Cory's real life eighteen year struggle with substance abuse is a story tailor made for an "after school special," or for a plotline in its primetime 21st Century incarnation in "Glee," the show he brilliantly brought to life for millions of so-called "Gleeks" across the country. 

In the days since the sad news of his death all eyes have been on producers of the hit musical comedy drama with a penchant for tackling social issues facing American teens.

How will they handle Cory's death? Will they kill off Finn or just have him fade away at college, with a touching silent tribute on a title card at the end of the first episode in the fall?

After losing a member of their family, the premiere of the show's Season 5 has been delayed until November. Though tough to digest, "Glee's" declining ratings will be tremendously bolstered -- at least for the first episode -- as America waits to see Rachel without Finn, Mr. Shue without his best man, and the show we sing along to without its leading man.

There are those who advocate not killing Finn off for reasons ranging from the belief that "Glee's" writers lack the skill to appropriately and effectively address a death in its plot and the unbearable pain of having to act and sing about the loss of a "family member" for a "plot point."

While the pain of reliving the death of a loved one is hard, and the timing may be fresh, actors rely on their past joys and more importantly, pain each time they step on a stage or in front of a camera.

While our hearts ache for Cory's girlfriend/fiancee Lea Michele, I suspect someone with her high level of talent could tackle the challenge of Rachel losing Finn expertly and poignantly. In the same way recording stars have paid tribute to lost icons -- Whitney Houston, Biggie Smalls -- in live award shows like the Grammy's.

Presenting a nuanced story about Finn losing his life while away at college provides not only the opportunity for "Glee's" cast and crew to work through their grief but also offers a unique and powerful moment for young Americans who are struggling with the same demon Cory faced in his hotel room -- heroin, specifically and its prescription cousin, Oxycontin.

Cory is not alone. Alarming and increasing numbers of young people are being initiated to heroin.

According to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services administration, since 2002, there has been an 80 percent increase in the number of 12-17 year olds using the drug. Consequently, they are dying in higher numbers as well.

The writers and producers of "Glee" do not shy away from taking on issues facing teens and Americans of all ages. Sometime with powerfully tear-jerking results, and other times (last season's school shooting episode) disastrous. 

Having incorporated teen pregnancy, bullying, abuse of over-the-counter medication, texting while driving, gay marriage, sexting, alcoholism, OCD, and numerous other social issues, though brilliantly campy, the show is a reflection of the lives of its youngest fans.

However, in Gleedom teenagers don't die. They are tormented by the normal teenage angst from relationships to catfishing, but they live to sing another day.

"Very special episodes," may have become frequent fodder for comedy writers and TV critics, but when "Growing Pains" killed off guest star Matthew Perry in a drunk driving accident, it stuck with me and helped to focus my teenage activism with Students Against Drunk Drivers.

The last song Cory gifted Gleeks with before leaving for a rehab facility was the iconic "Fight for Your Right (To Party)." Thirty days later, he left rehab, stayed clean while in the company of his girlfriend, and then traveled to his native Canada where he won his right to party and tragically lost his life.

Hollywood writers are experts at making us think by making us feel. Perhaps, if Finn suffered a similar fate as the actor who flawlessly portrayed the guy we love to love, the lives of some of our real-life loved ones can be saved.





headline: The road to a socialist paradise—Ben Bernanke’s easy money policy
byline: By Peter Morici


Ben Bernanke has convinced financial markets easy money policies will continue as long as needed. That may be forever, and those place American prosperity and sovereignty at grave risk.

The economy is as sick today as it was prior to the financial crisis and Great Recession. Those were caused by fundamental dysfunctions that remain unfixed.

China, Japan and Germany—the three largest economies after the United States—pursue cheap currency and protectionist growth strategies. Each amasses trade surpluses with the United States to prop up domestic employment.

Sooner or later the new housing and derivatives bubbles will pop, and America will be back in the soup—but it will be a lot hotter this time.

U.S. consumer dollars that buy their products but do not return home to purchase U.S. exports tax demand and push up unemployment. But for easy money those would throw the United States into a depression.

During the Bush prosperity, China printed yuan to purchase dollars and U.S. securities. Those drove down interest rates on bank loans and mortgages, helping bankers trade in derivatives, inflate housing prices and keep consumers piling up debt until the house of cards collapsed.

Nowadays, the Fed helps Beijing pass out the drugs. It buys $85 billion in Treasury and mortgage backed securities each month. Those finance Wall Street speculators in the housing marketing and another epidemic of derivatives trading.

Sooner or later the new housing and derivatives bubbles will pop, and America will be back in the soup—but it will be a lot hotter this time.

Cheap credit is driving up prices for farm land and propping up businesses that should fail--securities dealers are hoisting junk on retired investors who can’t get any interest on CDs.

The Fed’s printing press is propping up an already anemic economy. Since October, GDP growth has barely averaged 1 percent.

Americans are taking on too much debt to buy cars—the Detroit Three can credit their financial recovery to replacing cars worn out during the Great Recession with options laden, expensive replacements.

President Obama has pushed down unemployment by persuading young people to earn degrees that provide no gateway to good jobs.

In the end, consumers laboring to pay car loans and mortgages on overpriced homes will cut back spending elsewhere, students and weak businesses will fail on loans, and banks will need another bailout.

The economy will collapse again and then what will the Fed do? The only thing it has left—enable more federal stimulus by printing even more money. Hyper inflation and unemployment above 15 percent could easily follow.

America, welcome to the Weimar Republic—Germany in the 1920s!

It may go better—the economy just slogs along at near zero growth, Americans continue to borrow and sell its prime assets to Chinese, Japanese and German investors and becomes a pitiful recreation of the Middle Kingdom at the time of the Boxer Rebellion.

All this comes as the Obama administration uses the IRS and other federal agencies to target political opponents and relies increasingly on executive orders to get around a Congress that smells something terribly rotten—a president dictating the change he can’t win through popular support.

There are better ways. President Obama could stand up to China, Japan and Germany about mercantilism but he appears to have another agenda.

In 2016, voters in economic crisis will be much more receptive to Hilary Clinton than a Republican preaching personal responsibility and limited government.

Democrats will scapegoat Wall Street, and the left’s long-awaited socialist paradise will be at hand

Remember socialism—the system that makes everyone equally miserable.





headline: Obama's new START strategy is already a failure
byline: By Joshua Schoen


For nearly 40 years, the Soviet Union and the United States sat on the precipice of mutually assured destruction. Through luck and carefully crafted negotiations, both sides were able to avoid unleashing a wave of destruction that would end life as we know it.

Today, however the threat of a nuclear conflict between the major powers is practically nil. Obama’s June 19 speech in Berlin was merely a smoke-and-mirrors performance. After failing to come to terms with President Putin over Syria at the G8 Summit in Belfast, he has gone for the low hanging fruit―strategic arms reductions.

Nuclear weapons are the white elephants of the American military industrial complex.

Estimates by Global Zero in 2011 put America’s spending and servicing on its nuclear arsenal at $61.3 billion―more than all other nuclear powers combined, and more than four times what Russia spends on its arsenal.

Nuclear weapons are the white elephants of the American military industrial complex.

At a time of budget sequestration, the United States could indeed unilaterally cut its arsenal by one-third, as Obama proposed, thereby saving taxpayers billions while maintaining its deterrent power.

The fact that Obama announced this new proposal in Berlin merely demonstrates his inability to accomplish anything truly meaningful with his Russian counterparts.

Increasing anti-American rhetoric from the Kremlin, along with its continued support of the Assad regime, shows that this administration is mishandling its negotiations with Russia.

If the administration’s last performance on nuclear negotiations with Russia is anything to go by, it is likely that this new proposal will not mention the issue of tactical nuclear weapons.

At current count, Russia has more than 3,000 tactical nuclear weapons. Pockets of secrecy continue to obscure the actual number.

These are the weapons that the president should be most concerned about. These battlefield nukes― highly mobile and of limited destructive capacity―could unleash massive damage if they were to fall into the wrong hands.

Given Russia’s track record on arms sales and its failure to keep track of all its stockpiles, these weapons are a genuine menace to the international system.

In the hands of terrorist or rogue states, these weapons could inflict massive amounts of damage, yet they are small enough that their deployment would not necessarily trigger the mutually assured destruction switch.

Russia, which has been playing an increasingly adversarial role against the United States, is not likely to budge on this issue. Russia’s conventional forces are far weaker, and therefore the tactical nukes help buttress its fighting power.

Obama’s renewed attempt at strategic arms reduction should not be heralded as a real victory.

The conflict in Syria continues to rage, with Russia and Iran supporting the Assad regime. Putin remains as anti-American as ever. 

Rather, Obama’s proposal should be seen as an attempt by the administration to mask its ineptitude in dealing with adversarial states.

The Obama administration needs to change tactics if it is to achieve a more just, peaceful and environmentally safe world. Hiding behind strategic arms reductions does nothing to stop the fighting in Syria or the unrest elsewhere in the world.

In terms of foreign relations, Obama is a Potemkin president. 





headline: Egyptians don’t want to be ruled by a pharaoh
byline: By Judith Miller


Editor's note: The following op-ed originally appeared in City Journal.

The political lines are now starkly drawn. The country is polarized, and the stakes are high.

Defying millions of protesters’ demands for his resignation in a fiery speech late Tuesday night, Egyptian president Mohammed Morsi refused to resign and offered no new proposals for sharing power.

Declaring himself Egypt’s only “legitimate” elected ruler, Morsi said he was willing to “sacrifice” his own blood to protect the presidency. He warned the army not to re-inject itself in politics, as his Muslim Brotherhood spokesmen vowed to fight to defend him.

Egyptians don’t want to be ruled by an Islamic pharaoh—let alone, in this case, an incompetent one.

The army, meanwhile, has continued demanding that Morsi compromise with the opposition and respond to their demands by Wednesday, while spokesmen for the protesters insist that Morsi step down—that it’s too late for a political deal. Anything could happen now.

Yet what appears to be the largest popular protest in history has been inspiring for those seeking a modern, civil future for Egypt, the Middle East’s most populous nation and self-proclaimed “mother of the world.”

The military’s deadline for political compromise may be as fluid as the volatile protests themselves, but the millions of Egyptians who have rallied again in Tahrir Square and in cities and villages throughout Egypt have articulated in chants and banners a clear and uncompromising demand to Morsi: “Irhal!” or “Go Away!”

Organizers of the grass-roots Tamarod (“Rebel”) movement say that their petition demanding that Morsi resign has been signed by over 22 million people—nearly twice the number who brought him to office.

The Egyptian military appeared to be offering Morsi a face-saving way out of office that did not exclude the Muslim Brotherhood’s future participation in the nation’s politics.

He has now rejected these overtures. But the chants of millions show that he has worn out his welcome in this country of more than 85 million. Egyptians don’t want to be ruled by an Islamic pharaoh—let alone, in this case, an incompetent one.

Economists say that this unprecedented protest—larger than that which overthrew President Hosni Mubarak two years ago—is about shortages of subsidized bread, gasoline, and cooking oil.

Unemployment is officially over 13 percent; among young Egyptians, it’s twice that. Hard-currency reserves have plunged by more than half since Morsi’s narrow election victory almost a year ago.

So yes, there is an economic underpinning to the calls for his resignation.

But make no mistake: This rebellion is not about shortages alone.

Protesters in Tahrir have been chanting demands for a “Modern Civil Society”—a phrase that rhymes in Arabic.

It’s not a demand for “secular” rule; Egyptians remain God-fearing people. They don’t want to expel Allah from their lives or from all aspects of their politics. But they are fed up with President Morsi and his Muslim Brotherhood movement’s effort to use God as a political weapon to legitimize an authoritarian power grab.

On Tuesday afternoon, a rumor spread in Cairo—and there are many going around—that Morsi had left the Presidential Palace and was being “protected” by the Presidential Guard, in other words, by the military.

But his defiant speech seemed designed to box the army in—to make the military responsible for any blood that may be shed. Also on Tuesday, “sources” inside the Egyptian military told Reuters that the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) had already drafted a “political roadmap” if the Muslim Brotherhood–led government cannot agree on a power-sharing formula with the quarrelsome opposition parties. But can the military impose its will?

Despite his defiance, many in the street maintain that Morsi, dubbed “Morsillini” by Cairo’s chattering class, is a political dead man walking—his departure is inevitable.

If so, Egyptians will get a second chance to prevent their Arab Spring from becoming a permanent Islamist winter. Much will depend on whether the fragmented, fractious secular opposition can agree on an alternative tactical and strategic course for Egypt.

When I was in Cairo four months ago, political activists joked that the opposition National Salvation Front needed salvation itself.

So far, the Obama administration seems to be playing its limited cards well. President Obama has said that Egyptians, not Americans, must choose Egypt’s government, suggesting that America remains neutral in this monumental power struggle. But, tipping his hand in favor of the protesters, Obama also said that democracy means more than winning elections.

Indeed, democracy demands a civil society—equality, fairness, tolerance, respect for human and minority rights, and individual freedom. That’s just what Egyptians are demanding, and what the Muslim Brotherhood has denied them during its hapless rule.





headline: The beholden state – how government unions have doomed California taxpayers
byline: By Steven Malanga


Editor's note: The following opinion article is adapted from the new City Journal book, "The Beholden State: California's Lost Promise and How To Recapture It" (Rowman Littlefield, 2013). 

The camera focuses on an official of the Service Employees International Union (SEIU), California’s largest public-employee union, sitting in a legislative chamber and speaking into a microphone. “We helped to get you into office, and we got a good memory,” she says matter-of-factly to the elected officials outside the shot. “Come November, if you don’t back our program, we’ll get you out of office.’

The video has become a sensation among California taxpayer groups for its vivid depiction of the audacious power that public-sector unions wield in their state. The unions’ political triumphs have molded a California in which government workers thrive at the expense of a struggling private sector. The state’s public school teachers are the highest-paid in the nation. Its prison guards can easily earn six-figure salaries.

Meanwhile, what was once the most prosperous state now suffers from an unemployment rate far steeper than the nation’s and a flood of firms and jobs escaping high taxes and stifling regulations. This toxic combination—high public-sector employee costs and sagging economic fortunes—has produced recurring budget crises around the state.

How public employees became members of the elite class in a declining California offers a cautionary tale to the rest of the country, where the same process is happening in slower motion.

How public employees became members of the elite class in a declining California offers a cautionary tale to the rest of the country, where the same process is happening in slower motion.

California’s government workers took longer than many of their counterparts to win the right to bargain collectively. In 1968, the state legislature passed the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, extending bargaining rights to local government workers. Teachers and other state employees won the same rights in the seventies.

These legislative victories happened at a time of surging prosperity which in turn led to rapid growth in government jobs—from a mere 874,000 in 1960 to 1.76 million by 1980 and nearly 2.1 million in 1990—and to exploding public-union membership. In the late 1970s, the California teachers’ union boasted about 170,000 members; that number jumped to about 225,000 in the early 1990s and stands at well over 320,000 today.

The swelling government payroll made many California taxpayers uneasy, eventually encouraging the 1978 passage of Proposition 13, the famous initiative that capped property-tax hikes.

Government workers rightly saw Prop. 13 as a threat. “We’re not going to just lie back and take it,” a California labor leader told the Washington Post after the vote, adding that Prop. 13 had made the union “more militant.”

The next several years proved him right. In 1980 alone, unionized employees of California local governments went on strike 40 times.

Aware that Proposition 13 had shifted political action to the state capital, three major blocs—teachers’ unions, public-safety unions, and the Service Employees International Union, which now represents 350,000 assorted government workers—began amassing colossal power in Sacramento.

Over the last 30 years, they have become elite political givers and the state’s most powerful lobbying factions, replacing traditional interest groups and changing the balance of power.

Today, they vie for the title of mightiest political force in California.

Consider the California Teachers Association. Much of the CTA’s clout derives from the fact that, like all government unions, it can help elect the very politicians who negotiate and approve its members’ salaries and benefits.

Soon after Proposition 13 became law, the union launched a coordinated statewide effort to support friendly candidates in school-board races, in which turnout is frequently low and special interests can have a disproportionate influence.

In often bitter campaigns, union-backed candidates began sweeping out independent board members.

By 1987, even conservative-leaning Orange County saw 83 percent of board seats up for grabs going to union-backed candidates. The resulting change in school-board composition made the boards close allies of the CTA.

But with union dues somewhere north of $1,000 per member and hundreds of thousands of members, the CTA can afford to be a player not just in local elections but in Sacramento, too.

The CTA entered the big time in 1988, when it almost single-handedly led a statewide push to pass Proposition 98, an initiative—opposed by taxpayer groups and Governor George Deukmejian—that required 40 percent of the state’s budget to fund local education.

To drum up sympathy, the CTA ran controversial ads featuring students; in one, a first-grader stares somberly into the camera and says, “Pay attention—today’s lesson is about the school funding initiative.”

Victory brought local schools some $450 million a year in new funding, much of it discretionary. Unsurprisingly, the union-backed school boards often used the extra cash to fatten teachers’ salaries—one reason that California’s teachers are the country’s highest-paid, even though the state’s total spending per student is only slightly higher than the national average.

With its growing financial strength, the CTA gained the ability to shape public opinion. In 1996, for instance, the union—casting covetous eyes on surplus tax revenues from the state’s economic boom—spent $1 million on an ad campaign advocating smaller classes.

Californians began seeing the state’s classrooms as overcrowded, according to polls. So Governor Pete Wilson earmarked some three-quarters of a billion dollars annually to cut class sizes in kindergarten through third grade.

The move produced no discernible improvements in student performance, but it did require a hiring spree that inflated CTA rolls and produced a teacher shortage.

During this contentious period, the CTA and its local affiliates learned to play hardball, frequently shutting down classes with strikes. The state estimated that in 1989 alone, these strikes cost California students collectively some 7.2 million classroom days.

Los Angeles teachers provoked outrage that year by reportedly urging their students to support them by skipping school. After journalist Debra Saunders noted in L.A.’s Daily News that the striking teachers were already well paid, the union published her home phone number in its newsletter and urged members to call her.

Four years later, the CTA reached new heights of aggressiveness after a business-backed group began a petition to place a school-choice initiative on the state ballot.

In a union-backed effort, teachers shadowed signature gatherers in shopping malls and aggressively dissuaded people from signing up.

The tactic led to more than 40 confrontations and protests of harassment by signature gatherers. The CTA’s top official later justified the bullying: some ideas “are so evil that they should never even be presented to the voters,” he said.

Armed with knowledge about the state’s powerful public-union heavyweights, one can start to understand how the state found itself in its nightmarish fiscal situation.

The problems grew intense starting after the 1998 gubernatorial election, in which the unions bet their future—and millions of dollars in members’ dues—on Gray Davis.

The candidate traveled to the SEIU’s headquarters to remind it of his support during earlier battles against GOP governors; the union responded by pumping $600,000 into his campaign.

Declaring himself the “education candidate” who would expand funding of public education, Davis received $1.2 million from the CTA.

Davis’s subsequent victory was followed by a series of breathtaking deals that left California state and municipal governments careening from one budget crisis to another for the next decade.

Perhaps the most costly was far-reaching 1999 legislation that wildly increased pension benefits for state employees.

It included an unprecedented retroactive cost-of-living adjustment for the already retired and a phaseout of a cheaper pension plan that Governor Wilson had instituted in 1991. The deal also granted public-safety workers the right to retire at 50 with 90 percent of their salaries.

When the stock market slid in 2000, state and local governments got slammed with enormous bills for pension benefits. The state’s annual share, estimated by CalPERS back in 1999 to be only a few hundred million dollars, reached $3 billion by 2010. Counties and municipalities were no better off.

Municipalities around the state are also buckling under massive labor costs. Contra Costa’s pension costs rose from $70 million in 2000 to $200 million by the end of the decade, producing a budget crisis.

Los Angeles, where payroll constitutes nearly half the city’s $7 billion budget, faces shortfalls projected to grow to $1 billion annually in several years.

In October 2007, even as it was clear that the area’s housing economy was crashing, city officials had handed out 23 percent raises over a five-year period to workers.

In the past, California could always rely on a rebounding economy to save it from its budgetary excesses. But the current California rebound is limited to areas like Silicon Valley and global centers like San Francisco.

By contrast, metropolitan regions throughout areas like the Inland Empire and Central Valley lag far behind the national recovery. In fact, 11 of the 27 metro areas in the country with double-digit employment rates as of last month are in California.

It will take an enormous effort to roll back decades of political and economic gains by government unions. But the status quo is expensive and ultimately unsustainable.





headline: Lessons from the Paula Deen drama
byline: By Achim Nowak


Two confessions first.

I am not a Food Channel watcher. And I really like Paula Deen.

The first time I witnessed Ms. Deen on a television program, I, like so many other folks around this country, was enchanted by this earthy, saucy and larger-than-life personality with the big heart of gold.

That is Ms. Deen's public performance. And though I have never met Ms. Deen, I have a very strong hunch that this is who Paula Deen is. "I am not an actress," she declared tearfully in Wednesday's interview with Matt Lauer on "The Today Show." I believe her. Ms. Deen is her act, on- and off-stage.

The Paula Deen drama reminds us of the leadership qualities we so fervently need in our leaders.

This act has also become her undoing. Allegations of racial slurs were compounded when Ms. Deen, under oath, seemed to show little perspective on the impact that racially offensive language has on members of a target group.

She escalated her own drama when she failed to show up for an appearance on "The Today Show" a week ago and hastily posted three apology videos, instead. Her professional fortunes are unraveling as sponsor after sponsor: The Food Network, Smithfield Foods, Caesars Entertainment, Wal-Mart, Home Depot -- is severing the relationship.

It is tragic to watch a much-loved heroine in a public free-fall. We can spin many stories out of what is happening to Paula Deen.

Ultimately, this is a story of a business leader who has failed to show up under crisis. At a time when most Americans are resolutely cynical about our business leaders and politicians, the Paula Deen drama reminds us of the leadership qualities we so fervently need in our leaders, and in ourselves, if we want to fashion a collectively better future.

- Self-awareness is not a luxury item. Being self-aware is not a leisure-time pursuit for folks who have nothing better to do. The more people a leader impacts with her words and actions, the more central self-awareness is to ensuring that the impact is positive, intended, and sustainable.

Self-awareness, moreover, is not a lightning jolt that a leader gets once and is then done with. It is a daily practice.

Impactful leaders are mindful and willing to self-correct. They are able to evolve beliefs and values in the face of new scientific research or cultural shifts, as we have so potently seen in the many "perspective conversions" around gay marriage rights.

"I is who I is, and I will not change," as Paula Deen firmly stated in her interview with Matt Lauer, is not a mindset that fosters self-awareness.

- Crisis yearns for a quick response. When things go wrong, great leaders notice and respond quickly. They respond clearly. And they manage their emotions.

Rudy Giuliani did this magnificently in his response to 9/11. He was not only the mayor of New York City, he was also an affected citizen. But he showed up moment by moment, voice shaking with emotion, tears welling up in his eyes - and he acted.

Ms. Deen's "Today Show" interview needed to happen last Friday, when Ms. Deen was a no-show on the same program.

Three consecutive YouTube apologies in one day were the acts of a person who was unable to commit to clear and simple action. And while her emotion-laden chat with Matt Lauer made for great TV viewing, it also revealed a leader whose emotions had paralyzed her ability to take charge.

- Ditch the victim thinking. The more successful a leader is, the more folks will seek to vilify the leader, in turn. Barack Obama knows this. George W. Bush knows this. Oprah Winfrey knows this. Personal attacks can become cruel and vicious. And in a social-media-universe, this cruelty is instantly teleported.

Ms. Deen launched into her chat with Mr. Lauer by describing her distress about the lies folks were telling about her.

Such display of a victim mindset is a leadership dead-end. It does not support a forward-moving leadership story.

Any leader who plays the success game needs to also learn to play the "I will not wither under personal attacks" game.

Victim thinking is leadership jail; it seems to have imprisoned Ms. Deen.

We are a culture that likes to let people off the hook. Because most of us are so acutely aware of our own flaws and shortcomings, we yearn to forgive because we all wish to be forgiven, in turn.

Paula Deen's ultimate leadership stumble is her muddled mix of apology and defiance.

It makes forgiveness, the very thing she seems to crave, impossible to attain. Great leaders know how to fail with grace. Fully, deeply fail.

And own it.



Achim Nowakan international authority on leadership presence coaches entrepreneurs and Fortune 500 executives around the world. He is the author of "INFECTIOUS: How to Connect Deeply and Unleash the Energetic Leader Within" (Allworth Press, 2013). For more information visit his website:www.influens.com.



headline: Broadcast networks ignore Obama’s role in ongoing Egypt disaster
byline: By Dan Gainor


Millions protesting in the streets. Another leader deposed. Dozens killed in violent clashes, including at least 51 people slain on Monday. Obama’s Mideast policy is in shambles. Nowhere is that more obvious that Egypt, which just held its second revolution in as many years.

Egypt isn’t just a problem. It’s a full-fledged disaster, hand-delivered to us by President Obama. He sabotaged our ally Hosni Mubarak more than a year ago, then defended that strategy during his reelection campaign.

All of this is essential context to the collapse of the Morsi-government. Yet network journalists aren’t saying any of it. In 51 stories and briefs on the morning and evening news shows since the latest unrest began, ABC, CBS and NBC never mentioned Obama’s complicity in Mubarak’s fall.

If Obama wants our Egyptian policy to be one that rejects our friends and supports our enemies, then he’s doing an excellent job.

Heck, they barely mentioned Obama, citing the president by name in just 28 percent of the stories, even though America’s $1.5 billion in aid, our relationship with the Egyptian military and more are at stake.

Network reports were happy to quote Obama’s generic comment: “Our commitment to Egypt hasnever been around any particularindividual or party.Our commitment has been to aprocess.” But context and the history of the last revolution were sorely lacking.

During NBC’s third July 3 “Nightly News” report on Egypt, correspondent AndreaMitchell brought up Obama’s past support of Mubarak. She actually criticized Obama for waiting too long, not for abandoning a key American ally. “The irony is, after being accusedof sticking too long with HosniMubarak two years ago, onceagain, the U.S. is being tagged as being on thewrong side of history in Egypt,” she argued.

Nonsense. Rather than try to set Egypt on the road to gradual change, Obama threw Mubarak under the bus. Back in February 2011, Obama first said “change must take place” and about a week later outright called for Mubarak to go. Given the U.S.’s financial influence on Egypt, that effectively destroyed a key ally.

That didn’t exactly go well. By September 2012, Obama even admitted it. According to CBS News, “President Obama says the U.S. would not consider Egypt an ally, ‘but we don't consider them an enemy.’”

When asked during the presidential debates in October if he regretted abandoning Mubarak, Obama was clear: “I don't because I think that America has to stand with democracy.” He then listed several areas that he expected the new government to push including taking “responsibility for protecting religious minorities,” recognizing “the rights of women,” abiding “by their treaty with Israel,” and “developing their own economy.”

With the exception of Israel, Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood failed at the rest and now Obama is standing by them. Christians have been attacked, women raped and terrorized, and the Egyptian economy is a disaster. Fuel shortages are common and half the population is living on less than $2 a day.

The Muslim Brotherhood has shown itself to be radical and dangerous. One of the last straws for the Egyptians was apparently when Morsi called for a holy war in Syria in support of the Sunni Muslims against the Shia Muslim leadership.

The Brotherhood even released a bizarre, anti-Semitic statement about Morsi’s replacement, saying, “A Jew in Egypt’s seat of power.”

Now that same military Obama trusted last time around has rejected Morsi’s anti-American, radical Islamist government. The Obama response? He has ordered a review of the funding we send to Egypt. He even supported keeping the Brotherhood in the government.

If Obama wants our Egyptian policy to be one that rejects our friends and supports our enemies, then he’s doing an excellent job.

Egyptians have issue with that policy, but you have to watch the network broadcasts closely to see it. A July 7 “Nightly News,” report showed protesters holding two picket signs, one of Ambassador Anne Patterson with “Go Home. You are not Welcome in Egypt Anymore.” Another sign criticized Obama, placing a big red “X” over his face, and including the slogan “Stop Supporting Terrorists,” meaning the Brotherhood. On July 4, NBC’s Richard Engel also noted Patterson was “criticized as too close toMorsi.”

They networks aren’t just covering for Obama, they also covered for Secretary of State John Kerry. Kerry got caught in an embarrassing reveal when instead of helming the ship of state, he was caught helming his yacht at the height of the crisis off Nantucket. State Department denials later proved to be false.

Not that any of the big three networks mentioned it on their newscasts. ABC did include it on “This Week with George Stephanopoulos,” but only wonks watch that. Obama might be better off working with actress Kerry Washington than former Senator John Kerry. At least the beautiful “Scandal” star acts like she’s in D.C.

Actually, “Scandal,” is the right theme here, as the media cover up another Obama disaster.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Don't let White House delay ObamaCare’s employer mandate -- repeal it
byline: By Avik S. A. Roy


Tuesday evening, the Obama administration announced that it would delay by one year ObamaCare’s employer mandate, the law’s requirement that companies with more than 50 employees provide health coverage to all their workers, or pay a steep fine.

The law passed by Congress says that the mandate goes into effect in the “months beginning after December 21, 2013.” The White House has chosen to ignore the law, and “provide an additional year” before the mandate goes into effect.

But the employer mandate shouldn’t be delayed. It should be repealed. Policy analysts on both the left and the right believe that the employer mandate will harm the economy, and make it particularly hard for low-income Americans to find work.

It’s a real breakthrough for the Obama administration to implicitly acknowledge the harmful effects of the employer mandate.

In 2009, liberal blogger Ezra Klein described the employer mandate as “health-care reform’s worst idea yet,” because “workers from low-income families become more expensive than workers from high-income families.”

Some conservatives have worried that if employers drop coverage for their workers, and those workers go out and get subsidized coverage through ObamaCare, federal spending will go up. But it’s important to remember that we spend $300 billion a year through the tax code to subsidize employer-sponsored health coverage.

In 2012, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that dumping 20 million additional workers onto the ObamaCare exchanges wouldn’t have an impact on the deficit, because the ObamaCare subsidies would be offset by the subsidies for employer-sponsored coverage.

Economists of all persuasions, including conservatives, have long argued that one of the main reasons that U.S. health care is so expensive is that we don’t pay for it directly. Instead of shopping for health insurance the way we shop for car insurance or life insurance, we let our employers—or the government—take money out of our paychecks and spend it on our behalf.

- We’d have a far more affordable health care system if we shopped for health insurance on our own.

- We’d have far lower premiums, because we’d buy the plans that suited our needs, instead of the plans that suit our employers. That’s why, today, employer-sponsored coverage is far more expensive than the coverage you can buy on your own.

It’s a real breakthrough for the Obama administration to implicitly acknowledge the harmful effects of the employer mandate. But a one-year delay won’t do much to encourage employers to hire more workers, if those employers fear that the mandate will hit them in 2015. Instead, Republicans and Democrats should work together to repeal the employer mandate altogether.

If you’re a fan of ObamaCare, you don’t need the employer mandate to make the law work. And if you’re an opponent of the law, you should want more people to buy coverage for themselves. That’s a core principle of free-market health reform.

Congress has already introduced a bill, with dozens of co-sponsors, to repeal the employer mandate. It’s called the American Job Protection Act, and its lead sponsors are Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah), Sen. Lamar Alexander (R., Tenn.), and Rep. Charles Boustany (R., La.). “At a time when the unemployment rate continues to suffer,” says Boustany, “Congress must repeal this mandate and allow job creators to do what they do best: expand business and create jobs.”

Some conservatives argue that we shouldn’t “fix” ObamaCare, that we should let the law fail. And it’s certainly true that it’s not the Republicans’ job to bail Democrats out of their own mistakes. But real people, in the real economy, are suffering because of ObamaCare’s employer mandate. We owe it to them to repeal it.





headline: Happy National Employee Freedom Week, America
byline: By Priya Abraham


When you join an organization, whether it’s the Rotary Club or your local gym, you decide how long you want to be a member, and leave when you wish.

Unfortunately, that’s not the case for many employees throughout America. For them, being a labor union member feels much like checking out of the Hotel California: You can never really leave.

In Pennsylvania, for example, leaving the union gets complicated for teachers and other government workers. Take the case of Rob Brough and John Cress, two public school teachers who resigned from their teachers’ union—a National Education Association affiliate—after several years of wanting to quit.

National Employee Freedom Week will tell union members of their options, whether that is remaining a member, resigning, or leaving and becoming a religious or other conscientious objector.

As soon as the teachers quit, their union rejected their resignations. The union cited what’s called a “maintenance of membership” clause written into most school district and other government worker contracts. This provision means union members may generally only leave their union during a narrow two-week window at the end of their three or four-year union contract.

Teachers Brough and Cress are not alone in wanting to leave their union, but have discovered they don’t know all the rules for doing so. That’s why over 50 non-profits across the country have launched National Employee Freedom Week, a national campaign which runs June 23-29 focusing on educating employees about all of their rights in the workplace.

The Commonwealth Foundation, where I am a senior policy analyst, is a free-market think tank based in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania that has been helping teachers like Brough and Cress through Free to Teach, a project designed to empower public educators.

Our organized joined National Employee Freedom Week campaign because we know the issue of worker freedom needs national attention.

According to a poll conducted by the campaign’s organizers, fully one-third of union households across America want to opt out of union membership.

In our state, the number of union households who would opt out clocked in at 27.6 percent, while states like Illinois and Michigan saw 30 percent and 28 percent, respectively.

State by state, National Employee Freedom Week will tell union members of their options, whether that is remaining a member, resigning, or leaving and becoming a religious or other conscientious objector.

We know union members are hungry for such information.

In Nevada’s Clark County School District—one of the country’s largest—a similar campaign saw an astonishing 400 teachers resign from their local union last summer.

The Pennsylvania teachers’ case demonstrates how important it is to inform union members about how and when they can leave their unions.Because Brough and Cress missed their annual deadline to resign from their union, they were trapped and required to pay union dues for another school year—even though they opposed the political causes the union was supporting with their dues.

Thankfully, employees have the freedom not to pay for their unions’ politics. Brough and Cress, for example, work in a school district that charges “fair share fees” to non-union teachers. By law, fair share fees must coveronlycontract negotiations and worker representation.

Unions cannot use money from these fees for political or ideological causes, as they do with members’ dues. As such, both teachers wanted to become fee payers and ensure their paychecks weren’t supporting causes with which they disagreed.

The Pennsylvania State Education Association, for example—the state’s largest government union—represents 187,000 educators. A full-time teacher currently pays $489 to the PSEA and $180 to the National Education Association (NEA), $669 in total dues. If that same teacher became a fee payer, however, he would pay only $431 a year—a 35 percent decrease.

Knowing the options about union membership empowers workers, as it did with Brough and Cress. But most states have a long way to go to fully protect workers’ individual liberties, and many union members—both in Pennsylvania and nationally—don’t know what rights they have.

National Employee Freedom Week is about informing workers about their rights and empowering them to exercise their freedoms. Ultimately, there are ways for workers to leave the Hotel California. We just need to give them the right keys.





headline: Boy Scouts don't understand that stigmatizing obese kids doesn't help anyone
byline: By Michael Friedman


The Boy Scouts of America (BSA) raised eyebrows this summer when the group announced that the quadrennial Boy Scout Jamboree, which wrapped up last week in West Virginia, would ban children whose body mass index (BMI) was over 40 and require children whose BMI was above 32 to submit medical information to be included in the event. 

While the BSA deserves credit for its commitment to the heath and well-being of children, and for its efforts to address the difficult issue of childhood obesity, the decision risks perpetuating a stigma which could in fact make the problem worse.

Childhood obesity is a complex and varied disorder with respect to causes, physical and emotional consequences, and treatment.

Yet many people view childhood obesity in a singular, negative way. 

Obese children and adolescents are more likely to engage in unhealthy dietary practices such as overly restrictive eating, which paradoxically can result in binge eating.

There is perhaps no group that is the subject of more stigma than obese children. This plays out in the form of teasing, ridicule for their appearance, blame for their condition, and an assumption that they are lazy or lack willpower.

All this, despite evidence of powerful genetic, biological and environmental forces that maintain childhood obesity. And beyond the physical, obese children can also be seen as mentally unsound even though obese children can demonstrate considerable resilience and the American Psychiatric Association does not consider obesity a mental health disorder.

Stigma can lead to intense body image dissatisfaction and low self-esteem among obese children. This can be perpetuated by peers as well as adults, including teachers and health care practitioners. Rather than motivating children to lose weight in a healthy manner, stigma often leads to unhealthy practices that accentuate the problem.

For example, obese children and adolescents are more likely to engage in unhealthy dietary practices such as overly restrictive eating, which paradoxically can result in binge eating.

Further, childhood experiences often form the foundations for adult life. Ridicule about childhood weight can lead to poor physical and mental health in adults. 

In fact, people with eating disorders frequently report childhood teasing and social exclusion as the basis for their poor self-esteem and body image as an adult.

Further, the stress associated with stigma of obesity can result in weight gain and cardiovascular issues. The stigma of obesity thus contributes to further public health consequences.

The BSA's decision to formally and publicly exclude obese children from the Jamboree runs the risk of feeding into the stigma of obesity on all fronts.

First, by having rigid exclusion criteria they are erroneously saying that all obese children are the same in terms of health and fitness.

Second, the exclusionary policy alienates children and their families from an exercise-based activity, which could actually improve their health.

Finally, the BSA policy models exclusionary behavior towards obese children – if the adults can do it, why not kids?

The statement by BSA officials that children who cannot lose weight in time of the event have "self-selected" out of the event is if anything a testimony to this perception of exclusion and the potential damage done by this decision.

So what can be done? Certainly the Boy Scouts of America in setting its policy did not intend to perpetuate a stigma. To address the public health impact of obesity, it is essential that reducing stigma be a core element of its approach for future events.

First, the BSA should publicly condemn the teasing or exclusion of obese children and reverse it's decision to exclude obese children.

Second, the BSA should develop safety measures that codify its interest and concern for the health and well-being of all children at its events, including required medical personnel.

Third, the BSA should publicly embrace a wide range of approaches to manage obesity, including those that target behaviors rather than weight loss per se.

Finally, there must be specific outreach to advocacy groups that specialize in reducing stigma.
Leaving stigma unaddressed unfortunately signals that the BSA passively accepts it.

Attempting to manage childhood obesity is a noble goal, but we must not overlook the real impact of general public perceptions on the problem.

If we want a healthier society, we have to consider not just the physical implications, but the very real social and psychological aspects of obesity as well.





headline: Americans are losing faith in government -- and that's a good thing
byline: By Cal Thomas


Now for some good news, and it has nothing to do with the birth of the royal baby.

According to a USA Today/Bipartisan Policy Center poll, "Americans by more than 2-1 say the best way to make positive changes in society is through volunteer organizations and charities, not by being active in government."

Even better news: People under 30 are especially put off by politics and are "significantly less likely than their parents to say participating in politics is an important value in their lives."

Why is this good news? There are at least two reasons. One is that the less faith people have in government, the more they are likely to have in themselves. The second is that a public loss of faith in politics and politicians increases the possibility of government becoming smaller. That could mean less spending, a smaller deficit and ultimately, one hopes, lower taxes.

The less faith people have in government, the more they are likely to have in themselves.

On the same day the USA Today poll was published, a McClatchy-Marist poll found President Obama "is suffering his lowest approval numbers in nearly two years." His June approval rating was 41 percent, down from 50 percent in April.

Obama's endless speeches aren't cutting it. The public wants the action it was promised. It's not getting any and so is increasingly disillusioned with politics and politicians. Republicans don't escape blame. The McClatchy-Marist poll found only 22 percent of those surveyed approve of congressional Republicans.

Again, this is -- or can be -- good news for the country and even for Republicans if they get the message. USA Today quotes Rep. Aaron Schock, (R-Ill.): "There's a skepticism of government.

Young people say, if I want to feed the hungry or make a difference for cancer patients, it's easier to do that through a non-profit and see the tangible results up close than, say, trying to push for federal funding to do the same." At 32, Schock is the second-youngest member of Congress and may reflect the attitude of many of his generation.

What's the message? It is that the states, especially those with Republican governors, are mostly doing a far better job in addressing people's needs and wants than Washington.

As Peter Roff notes in U.S. News, "... while the 'blue states' are running up debt and flirting with bankruptcy, the 'red states' continue to take the lead in cutting taxes, streamlining government and job creation, according to a report issued Monday by the State Government Leadership Foundation ..."

Charitable organizations are addressing problems the federal government only talks about. World Magazine, a biweekly Christian publication, has given its annual "Hope Award for Effective Compassion" (note the word "Effective") to My Safe Harbor, an organization in Anaheim, Calif., that "helps single mothers break the dysfunctional cycle of broken homes."

The program promotes faith, personal responsibility and accountability for one's actions. Its goal is not to addict people to a government check, but to free them from dependency so they can have the dignity that goes with earning their own check. It is an anti-poverty program that works.

If Republicans want to regain trust, they should be focusing less on the failures of Democrats and more on the successes of Republican governors, Republican legislatures, charitable organizations like My Safe Harbor and volunteers. They are achieving goals Washington can't. Instead, Washington continues to misspend too much money with little to show for it, except ever-increasing debt.

The USA Today poll found that young people put "elected official or working for one" at the very bottom of their career choices. Given the performance of Washington's political class, who can blame them?



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Do the math -- Common Core = a massive, risky experiment on your kids
byline: By Dr. James Milgram, Emmett McGroarty


Controversy is swirling about the new Common Core national standards, which are designed to transform K-12 education in English language arts and math.

Especially in the area of math, Common Core proponents insist that it is the only way to address the problem of lagging achievement by American students.But the Common Core math standards fall far short of what students need for more advanced work.

In some ways Common Core amounts to a massive experiment with our children – an experiment we think the states would be wise to reconsider.

Most educators would agree that mathematical education in the U.S. is in crisis, and that the reason is the way math is currently taught. But Common Core does nothing to address this problem. And in fact, in many areas the national standards are fully as poor as the standards of the weakest states.

Hidden in Common Core is the real objective – presenting the minimal amount of material that high-school graduates need to be able to enter the work force in an entry-level job.

One of Common Core’s most glaring deficiencies is its handling of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing numbers.

Remember “fuzzy math”? It’s back with a vengeance under Common Core.

The classic method of, for example, adding two-digit numbers is to add the digits in the “ones” column, carry the remainder to the “tens” column, and then add the “tens” digits. This “standard algorithm” works first time, every time.

But instead of teaching this method, which enables students to solve problems quickly and routinely, Common Core creates a two-step process.

The first is to let students choose from several alternative algorithms (number lines, estimating, etc.) for doing one-digit additions, subtractions, and multiplications.

The second is probably to extend these student constructions to more complex calculations. (We say “probably” because the standards are not at all clear on this point.)

There is no point where the student-constructed algorithms are explicitly replaced by the very efficient standard methods for doing one-digit operations.

Why does Common Core adopt this convoluted method of teaching math? The stated reason is that learning the standard algorithm doesn’t give students a “deeper conceptual understanding” of what they’re doing. But the use of student-constructed algorithms is at odds with the practices of high-achieving countries and is not supported by research. Common Core is using our children for a huge and risky experiment.

There are also severe problems with the way Common Core handles percents, ratios, rates, and proportions – the critical topics that are essential if students are to learn more advanced topics such as trigonometry, statistics, and even calculus.

As well, the way Common Core presents geometry is not research-based -- and the only country that tried this approach on a large scale rapidly abandoned it. 

In addition to these deficiencies, Common Core only includes most (but not all) of the standard algebra I expectations, together with only some parts of standard geometry and algebra II courses. There is no content beyond this.

Hidden in Common Core is the real objective – presenting the minimal amount of material that high-school graduates need to be able to enter the work force in an entry-level job, or to enroll in a community college with a reasonable expectation of avoiding a remedial math course.

There is no preparation for anything more, such as entering a university (not a community college) with a reasonable expectation of being able to skip the entry-level courses.

(Virtually no university student who has to take an entry-level math course ever gets a degree in a technical area such as the hard sciences, engineering, economics, statistics, or mathematics.) 

Common Core thus amounts to a disservice to our students. It puts them at least two years behind their peers in high-performing countries, and leaves them ill-prepared for authentic college course work.

Those who doubt that this low-level workforce-development is the goal of Common Core should ponder the admission of Jason Zimba, one of the chief drafters of the math standards.

In a public meeting of the Massachusetts State Board of Education in 2010, Dr. Zimba testified that Common Core is designed to prepare students only for a non-selective community college, not a university.

In the waves of Common Core advocacy, from Republicans as well as Democrats, this was indeed an unusual moment of candor.

So before states forge ahead with a set of standards created, owned, copyrighted, and controlled by anonymous interests outside the state, they should be aware that those interests seem to be motivated by the desire for minimal workforce-development rather than genuine math education.

Is the Common Core experiment the best we can do?

Parents and teachers should refuse to settle for this Common Core mediocrity, and demand truly world-class standards for the good of our students and our country.



Dr. James Milgram, Professor of Mathematics at Stanford University, has extensive experience developing mathematics standards throughout the nation and served on the Validation Committee for the Common Core Standards.





headline: Anthony Weiner's woes -- does New York City really need an addict for mayor?
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


We now know that former New York Congressman Anthony Weiner did not stop sexting partially naked photographs of himself and sexually explicit messages to women even after being forced to resign his office for doing so about two years ago. 

Last summer, it turns out, he was still at it. 

Now, Anthony Weiner hopes New York voters will still elect him mayor.

I have always maintained that the sexual lives of politicians have no bearing whatsoever on their abilities to govern and that the media should stop poking around to find out if they are having affairs.

Anthony Weiner is no different than a heroin addict running for mayor who collapses with a needle in his arm during a debate.

I still believe that. But, in Anthony Weiner’s case, sex is besides the point. 

He has shown, through his inability to control his semi-public (online) behavior, that he has underlying psychological issues that probably include deep feelings of low self-esteem, extreme needs for artificial narcissistic gratification and an inability to overcome either one, in favor of serving the public and insulating it from his problems. 

In other words, because of fault lines in the foundation of Anthony Weiner’s psyche, feeling desirable has become so important to him (because inside, he probably feels the opposite—worthy of contempt and unlovable) that it leads him to repeatedly risk damaging the decorum of his family and the government. 

He can’t even keep his pathological behavior pattern secret. He’s no different than a heroin addict running for mayor who collapses with a needle in his arm during a debate.

This is not the resume of someone who can be trusted to pursue the goals of a city or our country based on the importance of those goals. It is the resume of someone who will pursue goals and advocate positions that make him feel important, manly or beloved. 

In addition to this very real danger that Mr. Weiner has and will put his needs ahead of the needs of his constituency, it is also a fact that the recurrence of Mr. Weiner’s behavior means it could well recur, again. 

So, there is every possibility that, were he to be elected mayor of New York, that, during his term, he would yet again be exposed for exposing himself in sex text messages. And that further jeopardizes the decorum of the office and the city and our government, in general. 

Here’s what Anthony Weiner has not yet done: He hasn’t told the truth. And that’s another reason he is unfit for office.

The truth would sound something like this: 

"I cannot yet suppress my needs for sexual gratification enough to make sure that voters can have any reasonable assurance that, in the midst of a future union contract dispute with teachers, it will not be found out that I sent naked photos of myself to a young woman via text, along with sexually explicit requests of her.

"I believe this represents a risk to the decorum of the office I seek and a risk to young people in New York City who might then believe that sending naked photos of themselves to virtual strangers is a wise thing to do.

I believe that my compulsioncould actually cause young people to opt for online sexual exploits as a substitute for self-esteem. And for that reason, along with the fact that my wife needs time to decide whether an open marriage is acceptable to her, since that is all that I can truly offer, I will not be pursuing any elected office."

Now, that would be leadership. And it’s all Anthony Weiner has to offer right now.





headline: Zimmerman trial: Inside the mind of how race divides us
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


The George Zimmerman trial would never have garnered national attention if a white man had shot a white teenager in a white neighborhood where a neighborhood watch group had sprung up. The trial has dominated headlines because it taps into a theme that continues to rivet Americans: The ways that race and gender continue to determine whether we think of people different from us as equal or trustworthy.

When experts and trial watchers debate whether Trayvon Martin was on top of George Zimmerman and how extensive Zimmerman's head injuries were, they are actually attempting an analysis of Zimmerman's soul to determine whether enough prejudice lurked there to lead him to kill Martin when he did not need to. They are attempting to determine, the great and late Zionist philosopher Martin Buber might have said, whether Zimmerman was viewing Martin through an I-THOU lens or an I-IT lens. Did he see Martin as fully human or something less than human?

And they could ask the same question about how Trayvon Martin viewed George Zimmerman when he allegedly slammed his head onto the pavement.

The I-THOU versus I-IT dimension is, after all, the fork in the road between empathy and disdain, between being able to put oneself in another's shoes and recoiling at the very notion, between striving for union and struggling against it. And human beings have an inborn psychological Achilles' heel that tends toward the I-IT way of thinking. We are splitters, not lumpers. We tend to divide the world according to what is similar to us and what is dissimilar from us. 

This gut-level--and I believe--neurologically encoded resistance to seeing ourselves in others, this focusing on our differences, rather than what we share (such as mortality, the ability to love, the ability to suffer and the ability to create) is, essentially, an obsessive-compulsive pattern. We notice first whether someone is darker than we are, older or younger than we are, fatter or thinner than we are, is driving a car like ours or one much more expensive or one in obvious despair, is female or male, is Jewish or Muslim or Christian. We inherently categorize. It is a reflex.

A person with long, straggly hair, tattoos and dirty jeans walking through a rich neighborhood can arouse suspicion, but a man with a crew cut, in a suit, wearing a Rolex watch can arouse disdain in a poor neighborhood. "What's he up to?" people mutter from their windows. "What kind of trouble is he going to start?"

But the challenge in overcoming prejudice is greater than this. The vast majority of us don't just notice those identified as"other," we have psychological antibodies to letting ourselves commiserate with them. And these antibodies could literally have been encoded in our DNA.

Maybe these antibodies had survival value at some point. Maybe thousands of years ago, subtle differences in gait or the shape of one's head or eyes or ears were linked with whether someone had evolved beyond the wild and had joined civilization. And maybe we retain vestiges of this I-IT vision--now so often misplaced.

Millions of men joke about women sexually, and millions of women joke about men. When Lorena Bobbitt castrated Wayne Bobbitt millions of women giggled (and just imagine what would happen if men joked about a woman whose genitals were savaged for cheating by her husband). When men pursue women sexually (and, increasingly vice-versa), it is often without much, if any, regard for their emotional lives. Black people wonder whether they can get a fair hearing from white people, and white people wonder whether they can get a fair hearing from black people. We interned the Japanese in this country, without a million blacks or whites marching in protest on Washington. We set an arbitrary age for retirement when there is no evidence that people, as a whole, at 65, were or are any less intellectually competent than people at 35. We watched Hitler nearly obliterate the Jews in Germany and beyond before we finally jumped into World War II. 

Given Mr. Zimmerman's last name, in fact, several people asked me early on, "Is he Jewish? He doesn't look Jewish, does he?" Why those questions, one wonders? Who cares? What would the answers to them say about whether a man feels threatened, or is attacked, or is being predatory in the wee hours of the night and fires a gun at another man? 

Who cares? Humans care. We still do. In the marrow of our psychologies. That's what we are still up against when we try to become fair and loving and make the most of our God-given, joined potentials to transform our species and the earth.

The Zimmerman trial fascinates because it is a window on this stubborn, inborn, reflex, obsessive-compulsive tendency to divide the world into I-IT, rather than I-THOU. And that is only partly because it bills itself as a look inside George Zimmerman's soul. It is also because it is, in fact, a window into a segment of the black community's soul. The entire case is almost entirely a creation of reverse discrimination--I-IT, again, with Zimmerman being "IT" this time. The charges that Zimmerman faced were trumped up or, perhaps, completely conjured up because he is not dark enough. Period. And we are going to find out whether not being black (just like not being white enough) is enough to get a man convicted these days. 





headline: President Obama living in dreamland, looking for pixie dust
byline: By Michael Goodwin


The photo of President Obama and Russian boss Vladimir Putin sitting glum-faced at the G8 summit sparked talk of a new Cold War. Let’s hope not, because we would lose this time.

Looking at them, I had one thought: In a showdown, my money is on Putin. In fact, whether negotiating over Syria or arm-wrestling, I want a Putin on our side.

He knows his country’s national interests and is prepared to pursue them. We, on the other hand, have a president who increasingly lives over the rainbow.

World disorder is growing by the day, and Obama seems not to notice or care. His big moment in Berlin — a speech at the Brandenburg Gate — was noteworthy for his profuse sweating.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Obama's risky admission -- after Zimmerman case America must do better on race
byline: By Juan Williams


"Trayvon Martin could have been me 35 years ago," President Obama said Friday in the White House press room.

The president's decision to speak out about the Trayvon Martin-George Zimmerman case is an explosive, risky step in an already polarized racial landscape.

The first black president has tried to speak about race before and not had a good response. That's possibly why he said that he's not calling for a "national dialogue" but asking people to do some soul searching at home, at church and among friends.

The president's decision to come out and speak, despite the warnings from his top advisers, reveals how deeply the Martin-Zimmerman case has torn at the nation's long, troubled history of race relations. 

Mr. Obama is trying to offer a leader's healing prescription for a nation filled with hurt over the Martin-
Zimmerman case..

The fact is president must have concluded that he had no choice but to speak out or be recorded in the history books as a political no-show on the critical race issues of his day. 

President Obama is already under fire for not doing enough on race, for not speaking out about black on black crime in the country, about high black unemployment, about the tragedy of urban education for black kids. Something deep in him must have forced him to speak out this time.

While it won't please his critics that the president spoke at all, it's clear that Mr. Obama is trying to offer a leader's healing prescription for a nation filled with hurt over the Martin-
Zimmerman case.

I know I have been hurt in the days since the verdict.

I have been full of sadness over the not-guilty verdict in the Trayvon Martin-George Zimmerman murder. The lack of justice for a dead teenager and the Martin family is sad, it is tragic.

Yes, the prosecution failed, in my opinion, to make the case beyond reasonable doubt that Zimmerman acted with the malice necessary for a conviction on second-degree murder.

Yes, the jury failed to see the need for justice for all.

And, yes, the media failed to be fair.

These failures began before the trial when the special prosecutor in the case, Florida State Attorney Angela Corey, did not convene a grand jury. After the local police failed to arrest or charge Zimmerman the prosecutors were in a rush to satisfy racial activists, the media and political pressure for immediate action.

That was a big mistake. A grand jury might have told them they did not have evidence to support a charge of second-degree murder. And a grand jury might have opened the door to prosecutors considering a range of lesser charges for Zimmerman -- from manslaughter to assault and weapons violations.

With those charges a jury, feeling confined by the technical limits of the law, could still have produced some justice for murder victim and his family.

But the prosecution’s missteps left this jury unable to get beyond the specifics of the second-degree murder charge.

The president of the American Society of Trial Consultants told the Washington Post this week that since the beginning of our nation Americans have had “this colonial perception of a jury as standing up for what is ‘the right thing to do,’ not for what is the correct, case-specific application of a certain law to a certain body of evidence.”

Meanwhile, there was no justice for Zimmerman in the media. Too many reporters wrongly made the case all about race. That narrative was unfair to Zimmerman. But some in the media found it too easy to impose a racial framework in which Zimmerman became a white racist attacking a black teen.

In fact, Zimmerman, who has a Peruvian mother and American white father, fits the bill of what is usually described as Hispanic.

People of all colors have racial attitudes. The idea of racial stereotyping and fear of blacks by Hispanics, Asians and other minorities seems beyond comprehension to some journalists but it is real.

To make the connection between black men and crime is not evidence of racism. As Jason Riley, who is African-American, wrote in the Wall Street Journal this week there is a disturbing high rate of convictions of black men for violent crime in America. So, let’s not tell lies in an attempt to claim race is not an issue. Americans, black and white, are all conscious of race, the history of racial division in our country and the painful curves it continues to throw at us all.

As part of a neighborhood watch program Zimmerman is assumed to have on the lookout for suspicious characters for all races. But once he saw the person in the hooded sweatshirt was a black teenager and angry at being followed then a long history of stereotypes of young black males as criminals kicks in for Americans.

And it is folly to pretend that if the situation had been reversed and a black stranger was following Zimmerman that he would not have been fearful.

Again, the media, like the prosecution, and like the jury – all failed to exercise the honesty required to act wisely.

All together the prosecution, media and jury failed to offer any justice to the mother of a murdered, unarmed 17-year-old who was not involved in any crime and not threatening anyone. The young man was followed as he was walking home, confronted by a stranger with a gun and then killed.

Whether the young man threw a punch or a rock it is hard to see any wisdom in allowing a killer to walk away because he feared for his safety after scaring the victim.

But one juror, identified by her jury service number as B37, said in a post-trial interview that Martin has some responsibility for his death because “when George confronted him he could have walked away.”

It is also true that “George” could have avoided the whole incident by staying in his car.

The juror, the wife of a lawyer, allowed that Zimmerman “went too far and did not use good judgment.” She also said the laws were “very confusing.” And then she concluded idly that “someone lost their life and nothing else could be done about it.”

Four of the five other jurors issued a statement disavowing B-37’s comments. They simply said “in the end we did what the law required us to do.”

And that is where we must do better.

The limits of the law are no excuse for failing to give justice to the family of a dead, unarmed teen who had his whole life ahead of him. It is no excuse for leaving another man, Zimmerman, as a target of hate for the rest of his life.

No matter where you stand on the outcome of the Martin-Zimmerman case, President Obama's admonition Friday for us all to stop and do a little soul searching here is on the money.

We have to demand more of our prosecutors, our media, our juries, ourselves.





headline: Level the playing field for small business -- pass the Marketplace Fairness Act
byline: By Hector Baretto


Some of us met our spouses in a bookstore; others reconciled with a loved one thanks to that greeting card they bought at the gift shop on Main Street; and some began life-long vocations picking up that first instrument in the neighborhood music shop. 

Small businesses don’t just sell us stuff, they touch our lives. And too often we take them for granted. This has never more true than in the Internet era—which is why passing the Marketplace Fairness Act is so very important. 

If you’re not familiar with it, the Marketplace Fairness Act would require online-only retailers like eBay or Overstock.com to collect sales tax at the point of sale—just as traditional, brick-and-mortar stores have always done. 

Continuing to allow government to essentially pick winners and losers based solely on tax enforcement is the antithesis of free market economics and conservative principles.

This wouldn’t create a new tax; it would merely close a loophole that has prevented states from enforcing their existing sales tax laws. 

More importantly, it would establish a level playing field, which is critical to a free marketplace.

Prominent conservative economist Art Laffer has explained how the current unequal tax treatment distorts market forces. 

“Exempting Internet purchases from the sales tax naturally encourages consumers to buy goods over the Web,” Laffer recently wrote. “Worse, the exemption incentivizes consumers to use in-state retailers as a showroom before they do so. This increases in-state retailers' overall costs and reduces their overall productivity.”

Other conservatives have noted how enforcing sales taxes that are legally owed is a pro-growth strategy. 

It’s been suggested that the recovered revenue can be used to cut other taxes, or close budget gaps without new tax hikes. 

Regardless, continuing to allow government to essentially pick the winners and losers based solely on tax enforcement is the antithesis of free market economics and conservative principles, which is why more and more conservative leaders are backing the Marketplace Fairness Act.

Still, some skeptics claim the law isn’t practical. But it was written specifically to make equal tax enforcement more efficient and feasible, not more complicated. For example, remote sellers will be provided with free software to make collecting and remitting taxes from different jurisdictions a simple matter. 

In addition, the law provides protections to prevent out-of-state sellers who use the software from being audited. They are far less likely to be audited under the Marketplace Fairness Act than brick-and-mortar retailers are now, as certified software providers will be primarily responsible for sales tax compliance. 

And what about those small businesses that depend on online sales? There is an exemption for businesses with under $1 million in online sales. Don’t let anyone say otherwise: This legislation is devoted to the small-business owner through and through. 

So this National Small Business Week, when you visit the local sporting goods store to pick up some more golf balls or buy a shirt from the corner fashion boutique, be sure to thank the proprietor for the risk taking, financial commitment, long hours, and emotional fortitude necessary to run a successful business that makes your life, your community—and the lives of his or her employees—better. 

Tell them you think they deserve to compete on a level playing field, so you support the Marketplace Fairness Act; the sentiment won’t go unnoticed. Better yet—tell your Congressman.





headline: Can America survive three more years of Obama?
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Can the United States survive the remaining 3 1/2 years of the Obama presidency? That was the question I asked a well-known veteran of Washington politics and national-security issues.

Though a Democrat, he is trusted and respected by both parties for his many years of advice and troubleshooting service to the nation.

I asked the question because our long conversation reflected shared worries about the rise of Islamic fundamentalism and America’s retreat. We discussed the disasters of Syria, Benghazi and Obama’s strange support for the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohammed Morsi in Egypt. We agreed the odds were growing that Iran would get a nuclear weapon and feared what it would mean for Israel and our Arab allies.

My friend's answer wasn’t what I expected or hoped for.

We expressed shock at the lasting damage done to our intelligence agencies by Edward Snowden, the sloppy background check that enabled him to get security clearance in the first place and the Keystone Kops effort to capture him. We winced that our nation’s reputation was an international punch line as Russia and China mocked our president.

Given that context, my question of whether America can survive Obama was not just a figure of speech or an exaggerated musing. I meant it literally.

My friend understood my meaning.

“I don’t know,” he said. When I pressed him, he reviewed the scope of the global disorder we had just discussed, and repeated his answer. “I don’t know,” he said a second time.

The exchange happened last week, and my heart skips a beat when I recall it. His answer wasn’t what I expected or hoped for.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Liberal media love new Jesus book 'Zealot', fail to mention author is Muslim
byline: By John S. Dickerson


Reza Aslan, author of the new book, “Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth” has been interviewed on a host of media outlets in the last week. Riding a publicity wave, the book has surged to #2 on Amazon's list.

Media reports have introduced Aslan as a “religion scholar” but have failed to mention that he is a devout Muslim.

His book is not a historian’s report on Jesus. It is an educated Muslim’s opinion about Jesus -- yet the book is being peddled as objective history on national TV and radio.

“Zealot” is a fast-paced demolition of the core beliefs that Christianity has taught about Jesus for 2,000 years.

Aslan is not a trained historian. Like tens of thousands of us he has been formally educated in theology and New Testament Greek.

He is a bright man with every right to hold his own opinion about Jesus—and to proselytize his opinion.

As a sincere man, Aslan’s Muslim beliefs affect his entire life, including his conclusions about Jesus. But this is not being disclosed. “Zealot” is being presented as objective and scholarly history, not as it actually is—an educated Muslim’s opinions about Jesus and the ancient Near East.

“Zealot” is a fast-paced demolition of the core beliefs that Christianity has taught about Jesus for 2,000 years. Its conclusions are long-held Islamic claims—namely, that Jesus was a zealous prophet type who didn’t claim to be God, that Christians have misunderstood him, and that the Christian Gospels are not the actual words or life of Jesus but “myth.”

These claims are not new or unique. They are hundreds of years old among Muslims. Sadly, readers who have listened to interviews on NPR, "The Daily Show," Huffington Post or MSNBC may pick up the book expecting an unbiased and historic report on Jesus and first century Jewish culture. (I will let my Jewish friends address Aslan’s statement on MSNBC that, “there were certainly a lot of Jewish terrorists in first century Palestine.”)

As a journalist and author who is Christian I cannot imagine penning a so-called objective biography of Muhammad and then concealing my conflict of interest in national media interviews.

In world history there are no religions more violently and anciently opposed than the crusading, fighting, at times blood-shedding rivals of historic Islam and historic Christianity. Even non-violent Muslims and Christians, like Aslan and myself, understand that we hold aggressively oppositional views—particularly about Jesus. National news coverage of “Zealot” has ignored this conflict of interest.

“Zealot” is written with the self-assumed authority of groundbreaking revelation from a historian. In reality, it is a religious person’s opinion about Jesus—from an adherent to the religion that has been in violent opposition to Christ for 1,400 years.

Aslan informs us that we cannot trust the Gospel of Mark--because it was written 40 years after Jesus’ death. He then chides us to trust his new book, written almost 2,000 years later.

I believe in Aslan’s right to hold and propagate any opinion. It’s a right that, ironically, Christians do not have in many Muslim countries.

My concern is that national media coverage be smart and forthright about this conflict of interest, just as it would be if I—a Christian author and pastor—wrote a book about Muhammad.

Pouring praise onto “Zealot” as new information about Jesus, without explaining its author’s devotion to a combatting religion, is blatant bias. This same bias would be unthinkable if the Christian and Muslim roles were reversed.

With its riveting demolition of Jesus, “Zealot” will continue to attract interviews—some from reporters who want to see Jesus deconstructed. Many more interviews will come from reporters who simply don’t understand that Reza Aslan has a horse in this race. He is not an objective observer, but, to use his own word, a zealot, with religious motivation to destroy what Western culture has believed about its central figure for hundreds of years. In many ways, this conflict is larger than Christianity and Islam. It is a conflict of Western and Middle Eastern foundations. These are great and important debates that we should welcome, but let’s be honest about our motivations, positions and conflicts of interest as we dialogue.

Let’s hope reporters in future interviews will, being informed, mention the glaring conflict of interest in this Islamic opinion of Jesus. It is no more objective than my educated views about Muhammad, as a Christian.

“Zealot” is not new work from a historian. It is a sophisticated presentation of views that Muslims have held about Jesus for more than 1,000 years.





headline: Obama's turning point has arrived
byline: By K.T. McFarland


There is a turning point in every presidency that people point back to and say, you know, nothing was ever the same after that. Sometimes it is the point where presidents go on to greatness. Sometimes, it is when a presidency unravels.

For Jimmy Carter, it was when a group of students seized the American Embassy and took more than 60 American diplomats hostage in November 1979. Carter could do nothing right after that. His attempt to rescue the hostages was a pathetic, feeble failure. During the oil crisis Carter went around the White House in a cardigan sweater turning down the thermostat and turning out the lights, while the American people endured gas rationing and long lines at the pumps because some third-rate petro powers decided to punish us.

America was humbled and humiliated, and Jimmy Carter was the poster child.

President Obama is strangely silent, or busy making speeches about climate change.

Edward Snowden is Obama’s turning point. While Obama was at the Brandenburg Gate delivering a speech to a mere 4,000 Germans, part-time computer programmer Edward Snowden made off with some of the most highly classified US intelligence documents, supposedly because he was disappointed in President Obama.

Snowden then leaked the goods to the Washington Post and Britain’s Guardian newspapers, and began a hide-and-seek game that has taken him to Hong Kong and Russia so far, and perhaps to Cuba and Ecuador next. Even if the information Snowden released is something the American people need to know, the way he did it belies his claim to be a hero. Whistle-blowers and patriots don’t go to these countries, spies and traitors do. And when they go they have to pay the price of admission -- by turning over information that country wants.

After Snowden arrived in Hong Kong, the Chinese government claimed the US was hacking into text messages on Chinese cellphones. That was music to their ears, since the single most contentious issue between the US and China today is cyberhacking. I was in China last month and met with the vice foreign minister. He bristled when I asked him about China’s cyberspying and cybertheft and claimed China was the victim of US cyberattacks. Now he’s got Snowden’s “proof” to back up that claim.

China might have been content to let Snowden stay in Hong Kong, but the minute the US charged him with espionage and asked China to extradite him home, they sent him packing to Moscow. Their excuse? The US didn’t fill out the paperwork request properly.

So, off to Moscow! The Russians claim to have had no advance notice of Mr. Snowden’s arrival, which is hard to believe since Russia imposes a complicated visa process on anyone hoping to visit, even if they only touch down in transit. They’ve also refused Obama’s extradition request, saying it’s none of Moscow’s business.So much for that reset with Russia. So much for President Obama’s goodwill gesture canceling the missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic. So much forhis offer to cut the US nuclear arsenal unilaterally. Putin is thumbing his nose at us while palming that Super Bowl ring he ‘borrowed’ from the New England Patriots owner.

Two of the world’s most powerful countries have just humiliated the United States of America and our President has offered lame excuses that rank right up there with “the dog ate my homework.” An NSC spokeswoman said the US had registered strong objections to Chinese and Russian authorities. Too bad they don’t care. Even worse, we aren’t likely to do anything about it.

The immediate damage of Snowden’s actions is that he has likely turned over highly classified information to our two greatest competitors. But the long-term damage is incalculable.This may start with the Chinese and Russians thumbing their noses at us, it will soon be the Irans and Venezuelas of the world, and eventually even the Cubas and Ecuadors.

And President Obama is strangely silent, or busy making speeches about climate change.

Some of us have been warning for years that “leading from behind” will have grave consequences. Now we have demonstrable evidence that if you try to lead from behind, eventually the guys up front will stop looking back for instructions.





headline: It's time to abolish the IRS and live free, America
byline: By Peter Morici


Frustration with efforts to get to the bottom of IRS targeting of conservative groups should illustrate to even the most ardent supporters of big government that the federal tax agency is dangerous to civil liberties, irrevocably broken and corrupting national politicians.

When all is said and done after this latest IRS scandal, investigators on Capitol Hill and the Justice Department may be able to finger a few malefactors but that won’t fix the agency. 

Thanks to presidential executive orders, the union representing IRS employees is deeply involved in the management of the agency. Its leaders have the self-proclaimed goal of doing whatever it takes to defeat conservative politicians. The union consults regularly with leading Democratic politicians—including President Obama—on electoral strategy.

Dealing with the hassle and cost of annual tax returns and the constant fear of IRS audits makes all of us less free.

Simply put, the IRS has cultivated a culture that encourages employees to exercise discretion in ways harmful to free speech and association.

The IRS is not a neutral tax-collecting institution but a collection of grass roots activists, enjoying virtually unchecked sovereign power to destroy the personal reputations and finances of those who oppose liberal ideas. It inflicts terror on ordinary Americans through the arbitrary and capricious interpretation of tax rules and onerous audits.

Dick Durbin, the Senate Assistant Majority Leader has openly admitted to asking and receiving IRS assistance in harassing citizens groups embracing conservative views.

There is little hope of curbing such behavior or reforming the IRS when his colleagues in the Senate take no substantive action to censure him, and the mainstream media finds nothing much to investigate having learned about such egregious conduct.

The only alternative is to shut the IRS and replace the corporate and personal income tax it administers. The latter are riddled with special interest provisions that offer low taxes to the rich and powerful and impose high rates on the rest of us.

Moreover, the present quagmire of incentives and disincentives from the agency distorts business investment decisions and consumer choices. It reduces economic growth and leaves all of us less satisfied with our lives.

Finally, dealing with the hassle and cost of annual tax returns and the constant fear of IRS audits makes all of us less free.

In 2013, corporate and personal income taxes will yield to the Treasury about $1.5 trillion. This money could be replaced by an 11 percent sales tax on all private outlays—be they purchases of computer equipment, college tuition or a lunch from the corner takeout.

Business and institutions would then pay to Treasury the taxes they collected minus sales taxes they paid on purchases of materials and equipment, rent and the like. This subtraction would avoid the double taxation of materials and create a “value-added tax” so often proposed by advocates of tax reform.

To pay taxes, businesses and institutions would file a three line return, reveal how much they collected, how much they paid and the difference.

Individuals would file no tax return at all!

Temptation would abound to exclude or exempt all kinds of activities from this plan but that is the kind of thinking that gave us the current mess—and inequities, slow growth and exceeding complex tax returns.

If Congress wants to spend more, it could raise the rates. That would make the cost of spending more on government activities completely transparent to all Americans.

If conservatives on Capitol Hill wanted to cut programs, they could explain it to voters in terms of how much those cuts would lower the rate.

Elegant, egalitarian and efficient, such a value-added tax without exemptions would give Americans the tax reforms they want but that privileged rich folks and big businesses spend a fortune forestalling.

The economy would grow more and Americans will live better and in less fear. And, yes, Senator Durbin, that is what America is supposed to be all about.





headline: Where are the UN sanctions on Hezbollah?
byline: By Benjamin Weinthal, Claudia Rosett


Berlin and Washington A year ago Hezbollah operatives destroyed the lives of innocent Israelis and Bulgarians when they blew up a tour bus in Burgas. “The wound in my heart will never heal,” said one of the survivors, the survivor Gilat Kolengi, who lost her husband Itzik during the bombing. She was speaking earlier this month to an Israeli news outlet about the trauma of the terror attack, along with another survivor, Natalie Menashe, who lost her husband, Amir.

The tragedy of these Israeli widows cannot be separated from that of a Bulgarian widow, Emine Kyosev, whose husband Mustafa was also killed in the attack. The Hezbollah terrorists murdered five Israelis, their Bulgarian bus driver and wounded more than 30 Israeli tourists on that horrific day in July.

With this atrocity staring them in the face, the European Union’s foreign ministers – with prodding from the likes of Austrian-born former California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger -- finally capped months of dithering by announcing on Monday that they are declaring Hezbollah’s so-called military wing to be a terrorist organization. That exempts Hezbollah’s so-called political wing, though as noted this week by Israel’s ambassador to the United Nations, Ron Prosor, “Not even Harry Houdini could pull off the illusion that there is a difference between these two groups.”

There is a rising mountain of evidence that Hezbollah’s terrorism, which is animated by Iran’s revolutionary Islamic ideology, crosses all boundaries and nationalities.

While the EU’s halfway measure should be welcomed as progress, it does not go anywhere near far enough to bring justice to Hezbollah’s victims, not only in Europe, but around the globe – nor does it address the true scope of the threat.

The Burgas attack is part of a rising mountain of evidence that Hezbollah’s terrorism, which is animated by Iran’s revolutionary Islamic ideology, crosses all boundaries and nationalities. Shiite fundamentalist Hezbollah, like its mirror image Sunni fundamentalist Al Qaeda, is a monolithic entity that cannot be divided into political and military wings.

Indeed, Hezbollah’s growing global terrorism has at times surpassed Al Qaeda's reach. National Counterterrorism Center Director Matthew Olsen said last year, “When we are briefing the White House, Hezbollah, coupled with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds Force, are the terror threats at the top of the list.”

Canada, the United States, the Netherlands and recently Bahrain have outlawed Hezbollah’s entire organization. And while sanctions alone may not be enough, the counter-terrorism track record of the countries that sanction Hezbollah suggests that blacklisting every aspect of their organization can at least help. By contrast, inaction, or half measures serve to embolden Hezbollah’s terror activities and the money-raising rackets behind them.

All of which raises the question: Where in this scene is the erstwhile defender of global peace and security, the United Nations? While Europe has been wobbling its way toward the current half measures, the UN has confined itself to the occasional hollow statement, condemning from time to time the carnage resulting from Hezbollah’s activities, but omitting entirely any sanctions on Hezbollah itself.

Surely it’s time the U.N. Security Council at least entertained a debate over the walloping case for branding Hezbollah as a pariah organization, and placing it under U.N. sanctions. While the U.N. itself has no clear definition of terrorism, the Security Council has the authority, should its members choose to exercise it, to target specific terrorist organizations. The U,N. did this years ago with al Qaeda,

If, as looks likely, Samantha Power is confirmed as the next U.S. ambassador to the U.N., there could be few better tests of her intentions and leadership than whether she is willing to pioneer sanctions on Hezbollah at the world body. If she gets there before the end of this month, there would be every reason to seize the advantage that the U.S. holds the rotating chairmanship of the Security Council for the month of July.

Hezbollah itself has provided plenty of grist for such a move. Its attacks, and the networks and rackets behind them, have by now struck close to home for every region represented on the Security Council.

In Africa, an official with Nigeria’s security services recently called Hezbollah’s military wing a terrorist organization.

That is a first for Africa, where Hezbollah has been expanding with near impunity, What inspired this Nigerian official to sound the alarm was the arrest of three dual Lebanese-Nigerian nationals, Mustapha Fawaz, 49, Abdullahi Thahini, 48, and Tahal Roda, 51, who were allegedly planning to strike Israeli and American targets. These suspects had stockpiled enough weapons, ranging from land mines and AK 47 rifles to anti-tank rocket launchers, "to sustain a civil war," according to the public prosecutor.

In Asia, a similar case is now before a Thai court, involving a Swedish-Lebanese man, Atris Hussein, believed to be connected to Hezbollah, Hussein is on trial for allegedly planning to blow up sites favored by western tourists in Bangkok, having equipped himself for this task with six tons of an explosive material, ammonium nitrate.

Central and North America have long been infested with Hezbollah’s narcotics trade, illicit sales of used cars and cigarette smuggling. Hezbollah operatives were implicated in attacks in the 1990s in Argentina. Recent signs of trouble include the entry of an alleged Hezbollah operative into Texas.

It is also worth recalling that prior to Al Qaeda’s attack on 9/11, Hezbollah was responsible for the deaths of more Americans than any other terrorist entity. In 1983, Hezbollah executed a double-suicide attack against U.S. and French military barracks in Beirut, killing 241 American servicemen and 58 French paratroopers.

Nor has Hezbollah lost its appetite for American blood. In January 2007, Hezbollah operative Ali Mussa Daqduq played a vital role in the killings of five U.S. soldiers in Iraq. The Iraqi government snubbed President Obama’s request not to release Daqduq from detention. Hezbollah’s Daqduq left Iraq and now enjoys a cozy existence in Lebanon.

The growing list of Hezbollah’s plots and killing sprees warrants maximum justice. For the EU, this ought to mean going beyond half measures, to immediately evict Hezbollah operatives from its territories, including the closure of Hezbollah-run mosques, associations and other fundraising operations that advance their terror operations in Syria and around the globe. For the U.N., there is no excuse by now for treating Hezbollah as any more benign than Al Qaeda. What is the civilized world waiting for? Where’s the backbone?



Benjamin Weinthal is a Berlin-based fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies. Follow him on Twitter@BenWeinthal.





headline: Barack Obama -- my deluded pen pal
byline: By Rob Taub


Since September 29, 2012, I've received 98 emails from President Obama and his political action groups (Organizing for Action, MoveOn).

These emails are always highly partisan, divisive and never pose a specific plan or course of action for solving any of the problems we face as a nation.

Consider the subject line of a June 4 email I received from Moveon.org:

"Victory! Workers v Bain Capital"

The email explains that employees at the Guitar Center in NYC voted to form a union by a "huge margin" of 27 to 15 votes. It conveys no information whatsoever about the issues responsible for unionization and merely states that: "Working conditions had declined after Guitar Center was taken over by Bain Capital."

In his second term, President Obama has embarked on a mission of polarization, which is clearly evident given the content of his emails.

This is classic Obama rhetoric. Employment figures are low. Manufacturing is down. Workers are earning less money.

Rather than accept any blame for the weak economy, Obama continually points a finger at Republicans -- specifically corporate America and Congress, and in this particular situation he has cast Bain Capital as the villain.

Rather than making an effort to unite our country, President Obama has instead embarked on a mission of polarization, which is clearly evident given the content of his emails.

I researched what actually took place at the Guitar Center and their labor problems are standard in today's declining retail industry.

Guitar Center workers asked for higher salaries and a better commission structure -- a typical labor/management issue that is anything but controversial.

If President Obama really thinks he is going to start a national groundswell based on the issues of 42 retail employees in a New York City music store, then America's economic stagnation will surely continue.

I believe Obama continues to follow this course of action because he is and always will be nothing more than a community organizer.

According to Wikipedia, "Community organizing is a process where people who live in proximity to each other come together into an organization that acts in their shared self-interest. Unlike those who promote more-consensual community building, community organizers generally assume that social change necessarily involves conflict and social struggle in order to generate collective power for the powerless." (Although some people don't cite Wikipedia as a primary reference source, I consider this a first-rate definition)

In political terms I regard community organizing to be nothing more than preaching to the choir. It is impossible for Obama to unite a nation when his sole mission is to only acknowledge his followers, who (based on the election) comprise 51% of the country. (Perhaps less given recent opinion polls.)

With regard to governmental change, community organizing may be effective at a local level for city councilmen or possibly members of congress, but on a national level it is about as useful as promoting a Beyoncé concert by handing out xeroxed flyers on a street corner.

When Obama first ran for president, he campaigned that he would deliver "hope and change," yet now according to his weekly emails "we" or "you" are the ones responsible for inducing change in America.

American politics has always been driven by bipartisan agreements reached as a result of negotiations.

Compromise is a vital aspect to a president's success in working with Congress, yet Obama, based on his limited experience as a community organizer, sees compromise as failure.

Consider my May 29, 2013 email from President Obama:

Subject line: "Hey"

"Rob --

1,332 days. That's how many days I have left as president. If you factor in the political circus around the midterm elections and eventually the next presidential campaign getting started, the days to focus Congress and the media on the work that needs doing are even fewer. My administration can do many things at once: Right now, public servants are doing everything from helping people find jobs, to researching cures, to keeping us safe. And you and people like you across the country can mobilize around many issues at once -- immigration reform, gun safety, climate change, marriage equality.

But here's the thing: Our opponents know that Congress and the media tend to focus on one thing at a time.

More importantly, they know that if they can amplify or invent anything that distracts from our agenda, that's one more day burned off the clock.

That's their strategy. Ours must be to not get distracted. The stakes are too high, and the time is too short."

This manipulative message presents no plan of action, and like Obama's other correspondence, it blames congress and the media for his failures as a leader. It's no secret that President Obama considers Washington politics "abhorrent," so his email responses are restricted to his myopic world view, where he continually retreats to the only limited comfort zone he knows -- Community Organizer.

Otherwise, when Obama has been forced to deal with the job requirements of actually being president of the United States of America, his behavior has been petty, intractable and thin- skinned.

He is offended when confronted with other parties who disagree with him and rather than attempting to reach an accord between two groups his approach is to always generate acrimony.

It's President Obama's responsibility to work with Congress, not mine or anyone else on his email list, yet based on his messages, he is oblivious to the fact that we're all too busy earning a living to do his job!

The tragic irony is that President Obama, who could easily transcend being a community organizer, doesn't appear to really enjoy or aspire to be anything else.

Here is a sampling of some other subject lines I've received from the leader of the free world and his organizations:

If this useless method of ward politics is how Obama and his brain trust hopes to galvanize the nation, then it's no surprise that we are mired in a series of scandals.

Nero continues to fiddle while Rome burns.





headline: O'Reilly and Trayvon cry for help,  Mr. President
byline: By Juan Williams


Mr. President, it’s your move.

The heat of public reaction from the George Zimmerman-Trayvon Martin murder trial is starting to cool.

Now the first black president has a chance to use his unique standing in black America to move beyond the racial static. He can help future Trayvon Martins – poor, young, black American men – avoid falling into more trouble and off America’s ladder of upward mobility.

Bill O’Reilly passionately made the point on his show this week when he said it is time for “straight talk and I hope the president is listening because we need him to lead on this issue.”

President Obama is in a unique position to do something incredible to help young black men benefit from the opportunities in our great country.

And the issue O’Reilly loudly nailed to the presidential wall for priority action is the high number of young black men who are victims of violent crime, who are convicted of violent crime and end up in jail for breaking the law.

“The statistics are overwhelming,” O’Reilly said. “Here is the headline: Young black men commit homicides at a rate ten times greater than whites and Hispanics combined.” And the root cause of the problem, O’Reilly said, is “the disintegration of the African-American family.”

It is hard for O’Reilly to make this point and get young black men or civil rights leaders to listen.

When a white conservative raises the issue of black men and crime, especially after the overwhelming white Republican support for a verdict that gave no justice to the black family of a murdered teen, a lot of people are going to see it as trying to shift the focus to problems in the black community. They also dismiss it as an attempt to distract black people from their outrage over recent events.

That is why it is time for people who care about black America to act.

That is why O’Reilly is exactly right to point to the black man with the highest level of credibility in black America since Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. – President Obama – and challenge that man to deliver the message to black America that it is time to focus on fixing the black family and helping young black men get on the road to success.

Bill Cosby, the famous comic entertainer, has a lot of credibility in black America. He has tried to deliver the message that there is map for young black men to find success. I wrote a book about Cosby’s epic effort, it's called ‘ENOUGH: The Phony Leaders, Dead-End Movements, and Culture of Failure That Are Undermining Black America – and What We Can Do About It.”

But no one has the chance to deliver that message as powerfully as President Obama can right now. He is in a unique historical position, with a singular pulpit from which to speak and act to do something incredible to help young black men benefit from the opportunities in our great country.

Here is what he should say clearly. The road to success is plain as day.

1. Stay in school and graduate from the highest level of school – but absolutely, no excuses, graduate from high school.

2. Take a job and hold it, no matter what job, no matter if your friends put you down for ‘flipping burgers.’ Use the job to get experience, make contacts with business people, and build a resume.

3. Marry after you have finished your education and while you have a job.

And the final step is important for you and for the future of your family and your community:

4. Don’t have children until you are 21-years-old and married.

Imagine if President Obama repeated that message over and over, ignoring the phonies who want to focus only on “systemic” racism as the reason for high rates of poverty, involvement with crime, and incarceration among black men.

Imagine if the president delivered that message despite attempted to intimidate him by civil rights leaders like Rev. Jesse Jackson who said the president deserved to be castrated for calling for black men to be good fathers.

Imagine if he decided to deliver that message and by-passed the so-called ‘racial experts’ and academics who prefer to look at America’s troubled racial history – slavery and legal segregation.

The answer is the president could make a difference in millions of lives and build a legacy on par with Dr. King.

And that message is a proven solution. Here is the track record for that solution as I wrote about it in my book, "ENOUGH: The Phony Leaders, Dead-End Movements, and Culture of Failure That Are Undermining Black America--and What We Can Do About It." “The poverty rate for any black man or woman who follows that formula is a mere 6.4 percent…in other words by meeting those basic requirements black American can cut their chances of being poor by two-thirds…even white American families have a higher poverty rate than black people who finished high school, got married, had children after 21 and worked for at least one week a year.”

The key for black women is also in the formula – do not have a baby outside of a strong marriage. Over a third [35 percent] of the black women who have children out of wedlock – now tragically more than 70 percent – live in poverty.

By comparison, only 17 percent of black women who are married live in poverty. And black children with both parents at home have a better chance for success, fewer dealings with the police, higher graduation rates and are more likely to marry before they have children.

Marriage and the presence of adults as role models and loving disciplinarians is absolutely critical helping young black men build the self-esteem that puts them in position to make good decisions that lead to the road to success.

As usual, my pal O’Reilly puts it more bluntly: “Right now 73 percent of all black babies are born out of wedlock. That drives poverty and the lack of involved fathers leads to young boys growing up resentful and unsupervised. When was the last time you saw a public service ad telling young black girls to avoid [out-of-wedlock pregnancies]? Has President Obama done such an ad?”

There’s nothing that could be done for young black men that’s more powerful, that would help them more, than strong fathers who are present in strong families.

Mr. President, it is your move.





headline: Soul Food -- finding peace after the Zimmerman verdict
byline: By Kelly Wright


Editor's note: Fox News anchor and correspondent Kelly Wright has been reporting on major news events for 30 years. This is the first installment of "Soul Food," a new column that will appear in Fox News Opinion every Wednesday. In addition to his news experience Kelly is also an ordained minister and Gospel recording artist. In his ministry he inspires people through his passionate preaching of the Good News in a bad news world. Expect Wright to candidly discuss the role of faith in an increasingly cynical world every week in this space.

It is widely believed that we are a nation divided over partisan politics. However, in the aftermath of the George Zimmerman trial, we find that we are a nation still dealing with deep divisions over race.

Anger, fear, sadness and frustration represent a wide range of emotions spilling over from the trial.

While many legal experts were not surprised by the not guilty verdict, a large number of people were hoping that Zimmerman would be found guilty. They wanted him to be held accountable for fatally shooting 17-year-old Trayvon Martin.

It is a time for finding ways to heal from the deep wound the Trayvon Martin George Zimmerman tragedy has opened. 

So, in the days since the verdict, angry people have been have been taking their message to the streets, chanting; “No Justice!No peace!”

The public outcry is loud, clear and mostly peaceful.

What remains unclear is the murky area of race. Some people fear that the life of an unarmed black teenager is cheap, that Trayvon Martin can be killed in a so-called act of self defense.

Yet, when I see so many people taking to the streets to express their outrage over the Zimmerman case, I am moved to ask; where is the outrage over the killing fields of Chicago? Where hundreds of black kids are being killed in a vicious cycle of violence? But I digress.

It is a painful time for the Martin family. Yet, in their sorrow, they continue to urge the nation to call on God to heal our land. For both families and the nation it is a time for finding ways to heal from the deep wound this tragedy has opened.

We have an opportunity to find reconciliation instead of retaliation, We have a moment to examine ourselves and ask if we will accept people for the content of their character, or malign and profile each other over the color of our skin or the clothing we wear.

Pastors and members of the faith community have been urging people to remain calm. Reverend Bernice King, the daughter of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. responded to the verdict with a tweet that echoed her father’s famous “I have a dream” where he said; “We must forever conduct our struggle on the high plane of dignity and discipline.”

Even President Obama and members of Congress are calling for calm. The president rightly points out; “Trayvon Martin’s death was a tragedy. Not just for his family, or for any one community, but for America.” Mr. Obama says we should ask ourselves how we can prevent such tragedies like this.

During his speech at the NAACP Convention on Tuesday in Orlando, Florida, Attorney General Eric Holder candidly shared how he has talked with his children about how to deal with racism.

As the father of two sons, I have held similar discussions with them. My wife and I have also had the task of preparing them for small-minded people who would treat them unfairly because of their color. At the same time, I have encouraged them to develop friends with people of all nationalities, ethnicity and faiths.

So, how can we prevent this from happening again? The Bible advises; “Don’t hit back; discover beauty in everyone. If you’ve got it in you, get along with everybody. Don’t insist on getting even; that’s not for you to do. “I’ll do the judging,” says God. “I’ll take care of it.”

Our Scriptures tell us that if you see your enemy hungry, go buy that person lunch, or if he’s thirsty, get him a drink. Your generosity will surprise him with goodness. "Don’t let evil get the best of you; get the best of evil by doing good.” -- Romans 12:17-21

Just imagine if on that fateful night in Sanford, if George Zimmerman and Trayvon Martin had acted on this principle? If Zimmerman had reached out to offer Martin a ride home to get out of the rain, instead of perceiving Martin as a threat or menace to society? What if? Sadly, we’ll never know.

This kind of calamity is like a Greek tragedy; there are no winners. Everybody involved in this case loses. Broken hearts and shattered lives will have to be mended. And when the uproar ends, we will still need to reach a place of healing.

We cannot reach that destination through pointing accusing fingers and malicious talk.

Healing comes through forgiveness and reconciliation, which requires the hard work of putting our ego, pride and prejudice in check.

In times of turmoil and despair, Dr. King focused on using the weapons of goodness and mercy; “Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that.” -- "Strength To Love" (1963)

In that spirit, I offer this prayer to free your mind from despair and feed your soul with hope; “Lord, make me an instrument of your peace, where there is hatred, let me sow love. Where there is injury, pardon. Where there is doubt, faith. Where there is despair, hope. Where there is darkness, light. Where there is sadness, joy."

Through this we can learn to know justice and know peace. Walls of pride and prejudice will cease when we are God’s instruments of peace.





headline: Your child's safety and severe weather
byline: By Janice Dean


I've been thinking a lot lately about the tornadoes that killed dozens of people and caused so much destruction in Oklahoma: Two EF 5’s that ripped through the communities of Moore and El Reno, and not surprisingly, the result was fatal. According to NOAA, Statistically, on average, Tornadoes kill about 60 people each year, mostly from flying or falling debris.

This year, the storm stories I just can’t get out of my mind are the ones about the children we lost.

Classes were still in session at Plaza Towers when the tornado destroyed the school. Cars were thrown into the building and the playground was flattened. 

I’ve often wondered how kids are taught in schools about deadly weather events. If you live in tornado alley, are there drills to teach the little ones what to do when the sirens go off? 



I talked to Douglas Rucker who is a science teacher at Eliot Elementary in Tulsa Oklahoma who says they have tornado drills like other schools have fire drills with just minutes to react. They have several of them a year. 

All the students are given an area to go to if and when there is a warning, and they are taught this at a very early age.The teachers are all given specific roles and which group to be in charge of during the event. 

But, when there is a tragedy in their hometown – one that destroys their own home or community, how do they cope? 

How do parents talk to their children about these types of natural disasters? 

The same can be said about children who live in areas where there are earthquakes, floods, or hurricanes. 

According to the website Helping Children after a Natural Disaster, experiencing a dangerous storm can be very traumatic for children. It affects their sense of security and normalcy. 

The National Child Traumatic Stress Network says that most families do recover from natural disasters over time, especially with the support of family, friends and organizations. The length of recovery depends on how frightening or close to the event the child was – whether they had to flee their home, and the extent of the damage and loss. 

Some families get back to routines (school, activities, etc.) quickly, while others have to relocate and perhaps deal with losing their home and possessions. 

Medical care and even financial hardship will cause stress on their lives, and in the worst case - the loss of a family member or pet. 

In some rare cases, children will show signs of post-traumatic stress disorder in which case adults should immediately seek professional help to help their kids work through their fears and anxieties.

Here are a list of some of the steps parents can take in helping kids work through their fears and anxieties in the event of a natural disaster (source: National Association of School Psychologists):

1) Remain calm and reassuring.
2) Acknowledge and normalize their feelings.
3) Encourage children to talk about disaster-related events.
4) Promote positive coping and problem-solving skills.
5) Emphasize children’s resiliency.
6) Strengthen children’s friendship and peer support.

For more information on how to help children after a natural disaster, there are many websites people can look to for advice. Here are some that I received great information from:

-- National Association of School Psychologists

-- Talking to Kids About World Natural Disasters

The Red Cross also has links with how to help families recovering from a disaster:

-- Recovering Emotionally

-- Helping Children Cope with Disaster

No one can truly predict what can happen tomorrow. Even studying the weather so closely, we can’t know exactly what area will be hit the worst despite the fact that weather forecasting is getting much more precise. 

Preparation is always needed, especially if you live in areas threatened by extreme weather events.

The bottom line: know what to do and where to go if you need to evacuate. Have a plan, and keep your children aware of what they need to do in the event of an emergency. Keep in touch with schools, teachers and emergency officials. 

I have a quote I keep at my desk that reminds me of how important preparation is not only in weather situations, but for life in general:

“The time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining.” -- John F. Kennedy

For more information on how to prepare your home for potential future weather events, here’s a good starting point.





headline: What's Obama's endgame after we arm Syria's rebels?
byline: By Cal Thomas


Two recent newspaper editorials illustrate the double-mindedness some feel about President Obama's decision to provide small arms and ammunition to Syrian rebels.

The Washington Post headlined an editorial: "No time for half-measures: Syria's rebels need a robust intervention from the Obama administration."

The New York Times took a more realistic approach: "After Arming the Rebels, Then What? President Obama should be careful about being dragged into the brutal Syrian war."

Deposing a mass murderer in favor of jihadists committed to "holy war" against America and the West is like choosing a firing squad over the guillotine.

I'm on the side of the Times.

Some promote U.S. involvement in Syria for humanitarian reasons. That might be sufficient if the outcome advanced humanitarian concerns, but exchanging one tyrant for another is not a long-term solution.

One Syrian rebel group has reportedly pledged allegiance to Usama bin Laden's replacement, Al Qaeda leader Sheik Ayman al-Zawahri. Deposing a mass murderer in favor of jihadists committed to "holy war" against America and the West is like choosing a firing squad over the guillotine.

The Washington Post reported the murder of a 14-year-old boy by Syrian rebels. The boy's crime? When he "was asked to bring one of his customers some coffee," the Post writes, "he reportedly refused, saying, 'Even if (Prophet) Mohammed comes back to life, I won't.'" A group of Islamist rebels took this as an insult to Islam. Are these the rebels President Obama's backing?

The United States has a bad track record in the Middle East. President Jimmy Carter helped topple the shah of Iran. Now the shah's replacements, in concert with Hezbollah, writes ABC News, "have been helping the Syrian regime of President Bashar Assad..."

Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei recently called Israel a "cancerous tumor" and vowed Iran's support to any nation or group that attacks it.

Iran is intent on acquiring nuclear weapons.

The Independent newspaper in Britain reports that Iran has pledged to send 4,000 Iranian Revolutionary Guards to Syria to support President Assad.

In Egypt, Mohamed Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood candidate, won the last election after the U.S. supported the ouster of Hosni Mubarak.

The outcome in Libya, following U.S. support of rebels opposed to Muammar Qaddafi, is unlikely to be pleasant should that nation's draft constitution based on Sharia law be adopted.

The Obama administration reportedly is ready to consider a U.N. request to resettle some Syrian refugees in the United States. "...part of an international effort that could bring thousands of Syrians to American cities and towns," writes the Los Angeles Times. Can we be sure a number of them won't be jihadists?

For too long, American involvement in the Middle East has employed the wrong formula in the mistaken belief that we can change the thinking of radical Islamists.

Many administrations have pressured Israel in the misguided and unjustified hope that this would produce a change in outlook and a reset in religious fanaticism.

It hasn't. In fact, our "reach-out" efforts are seen as weakness in much of the Islamic world.

Arab and Muslim peoples have been at war with other nations and each other for centuries. The two major factions of Islam -- Sunni and Shia -- are in constant conflict over which one is Prophet Mohammed's legitimate heir.

The "infidel" West can't help settle any of this and is more likely to unite the warring factions against us, as it has in the past.

Add to this a scenario that resembles the Cold War. Russia is "all-in," supplying anti-ship cruise missiles to President Assad's regime. Moscow, according to the Wall Street Journal, has deployed at least a dozen warships to patrol waters near the Russian naval base in the Syrian city of Tartus. President Obama's token gesture of small arms and ammunition is the equivalent of dipping one's toe in the Mediterranean Sea and calling it swimming.

As in so many other instances, President Obama is, according to the Daily Telegraph, "leading from behind in Syria -- and can't see where he is going."

The president wants credit for withdrawing American forces from Iraq and Afghanistan, but with Syria he is involving the U.S. in another war that can't be "won," at least not in a way that will advance American interests.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Hey Congress, nothing can happen if you won't talk with each other
byline: By Gary Shapiro


Recently, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) gathered 97 of his Senate colleagues in the Old Senate Chamber for a three-and-a-half-hour private session – no staff or press, just senators. For the first time in several years, senators from both parties listened to each other. By all accounts, trust and communication improved.

By calling this session, Sen. Reid has shown he is the leader of the whole Senate, not just one partisan group. We can only hope our elected leaders from both chambers of Congress will take his cue and begin to work together for the good of our great nation.

Increasingly over the last few years, America’s leaders have been deeply divided on the key issues facing the United States.

It’s high time for Congress to drop the party rhetoric and start leading.

Elected leaders from both parties appear rarely to communicate or cooperate; hyper-partisanship has resulted in stalemates, a lack of budgets, continuing resolutions to fund government, sequestration rather than decision-making and general paralysis on our most important issues.

In the first half of 2013, Congress has passed only 18 bills, although the Democrat-controlled Senate has passed 29 bills and the Republican-controlled House has passed 89.

The American people have taken notice of the gridlock. When House members and senators return to their districts and states, citizens want to know why they can’t get things done.

A recent Gallup poll showed congressional approval ratings at some of their lowest in history – a mere 15 percent of Americans approve of the job Congress is doing. The top reason for the high disapproval rating: partisan gridlock.

We may not all agree on every issue, but the American people understand that it is critical for people to work together to solve problems and move the nation forward. It’s high time for Congress to drop the party rhetoric and start leading.

So Sen. Reid’s stab at inclusiveness last week was a breakthrough. It paved the way for a deal the next day, avoiding a change in Senate rules and opening the way for the Senate to approve seven key presidential nominations that have been held up for far too long.

Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) played a big role in encouraging Senate Republicans to work with Democrats to reach a compromise, receiving warm commendation from Sen. Reid.

Now it is House Speaker John Boehner’s (R-Ohio) opportunity to lead in a similar way. By every indication he is a decent person with humble beginnings who serves his nation to make it better. But now he must decide whether his job is to follow the wishes of the Republican majority in the House, or to lead the entire House to work together to solve major national problems.

One opportunity is immigration. All agree the system is broken.

The Senate last month passed a bipartisan bill to begin fixing our immigration system, but the bill faces a tough vote in the House.

Some have urged Rep. Boehner to follow the “Hastert Rule,” named after former Speaker Dennis Hastert, who refused to bring legislation up for a vote unless a Republican majority supported it.

This approach is not leading. It is following.

If congressional members are putting the needs of their party ahead of the needs of the nation, they should not be in office.

Ironically, the American people, and probably most rank and file House members, disagree with the House leaders and want compromises and solutions on tough issues like immigration, as well as issues like patent litigation reform, tax policy and the budget deficit.

Lack of leadership simply preserves the status quo. The U.S. is a great country, but we cannot begin to address – let alone fix – our problems if our politicians refuse to talk to each other.

House Speaker Boehner and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) should follow Sen. Reid’s example. They have a chance to lead in Congress, and to encourage our elected representatives to lead this country. Whether they meet the challenge may well determine whether our children inherit a strong, first-rate nation – or something else entirely.





headline: Trayvon Martin's testimony wouldn't have changed anything in Zimmerman trial
byline: By John Lott


In the days since 17-year-old Trayvon Martin was shot and killed by 28-year-old George Zimmerman, a common claim has been: "we will never know what happened between Zimmerman and Martin since the only person who knows the truth and is still alive is Zimmerman."

But this statement is not accurate. The closing arguments in Zimmerman's case start today. And the truth is, we know a lot about what happened on that fateful night. Trayvon Martin's testimony, could he have spoken, wouldn't changed anything.

For those who have watched the trial, ask yourself: is there even one piece of convincing evidence that Zimmerman did not act to defend himself from a threat of “imminent death or great bodily harm”?

There was no convincing evidence to support the charges against Zimmerman.

There is a reason that the local District Attorney refused to bring the case against Zimmerman and an outside District Attorney had to be brought in to handle it. And that the chief of police was also removed from his job because he refused to charge Zimmerman with a crime. Also consider that the lead detective on the case told the jury he believed Zimmerman's version of the events that happened.

If both Zimmerman and Martin had both been white or if Zimmerman had been darker skinned, this case would never have gotten to court.

There was no convincing evidence to support the charges against Zimmerman.

The problem the prosecution faced should have been glaring to anyone familiar with criminal trials.

When I was chief economist at the U.S. Sentencing Commission I read hundreds of trial transcripts. Prosecutors consistently put police and their experts on the witness stand early in the trial because they used them to sketch out the theory of the case. Things were different in the Zimmerman trial. Here, prosecutors began with weak testimony from witnesses -- people who either really couldn't tell what they had seen or who couldn't be sure what had happened.

The debate among the forensic experts wasn't over who suffered injuries. Everyone agreed that there were wounds on Martin's hands and none on Zimmerman's hands.

Both the front and back of Zimmerman's head suffered wounds, while no similar wounds were found on Martin.

The prosecution experts provided no evidence contradicting Zimmerman's claim that Martin was on top of him when he was shot.

Zimmerman's expert, Dr. Vincent Di Maio -- the man whose book the Sanford medical examiner had referenced to as the authority on the subject -- explained from both the angle of the bullet’s entry into the body and its distance from the Martin's body that Martin was on top of Zimmerman.

The debate between the experts was over how severe Zimmerman's wounds were.

After examining photos of Zimmerman immediately after the attack, Jacksonville medical examiner, Valerie Rao, claimed that they were "insignificant," that there was "a chance" that the number of blows Zimmerman suffered could range from just one to more than a half dozen. She wouldn't say what the maximum number could be.

Di Maio pointed out that you can't judge the severity of blows from photos and certainly not just the photos taken right at the time of the injury as patterns of injury can only be revealed based on how bruising changes over time. Furthermore she said that "You can have severe head trauma without any marks on the head." Di Maio identified six separate blows that were landed on Zimmerman's face and head.

Witnesses saw the struggle between Zimmerman and Trayvon Martin.

One witness who had by far the clearest view, Jonathan Good, was only 15 to 20 feet away immediately before the shot was fired. His testimony on the color of the men's clothes and skin confirmed that Martin was on top of Zimmerman, straddling and pummeling him.

If Martin had been alive today, what could his testimony have added to any of this?

Could he have explained away the angle of the bullet?

What would Martin have said about why his knuckles and Zimmerman's head showed signs of bruising?

With Zimmerman's broken nose and lacerations on the back of his head, would it have mattered if Martin had told the court that he really hadn't hit Zimmerman that hard?

The prosecution never provided any evidence that Zimmerman continued following Martin after the 911 operator suggested that he stop doing so.

Suppose Martin could testify that Zimmerman had continued to follow him, would that have mattered?

No, because even if Martin had indeed been followed, it wouldn’t have justified Martin punching Zimmerman’s nose, pinning him down and repeatedly hitting him and slamming his head into the concrete.

Suppose Martin had claimed -- along with his mother, father and brother -- that he was the one screaming for help. Would that have really mattered?

Would that have offset the all the witnesses who said that Zimmerman was the one screaming?

Under cross examination, how would Martin have explained that he was one calling for help when he was the one on top of Zimmerman and hitting him?

Tuesday’s testimony from the city manager highlighted how political considerations interfered with the investigation. When police had presented that evidence to Martin's father they learned that his father didn't recognize the screams as coming from his son.

But then Sanford City Manager Norton Bonaparte intervened in the police investigation and kept the police out of the room when the 911 call with the screams was played for Martin's mother.

The political and racial angle of this case -- that has been inflamed by President Obama, Al Sharpton and many others -- has left lasting damage to race relations in the U.S.

As Zimmerman’s defense attorney Mark O'Mara remarked this week: "my client will never be safe because there are a percentage of the population who are angry, they're upset and they may well take it out on him. So he'll never be safe."

Zimmerman’s right to defend himself has already saved his life once. Unfortunately, with the anger generated by those seeking political gain from the case, he might unfortunately need to defend himself yet again.





headline: Men -- the new second class citizens
byline: By Suzanne Venker


In November of last year, I wrote an article for Fox News called The War on Men (which I subsequently expanded to an eBook). To keep it pithy, in the piece I focused on one effect of this war: the lack of marriageable men. But there’s so much more to it. The truth is, men have become second-class citizens.

The most obvious proof is male bashing in the media. It is rampant and irrefutable. From sit-coms and commercials that portray dad as an idiot to biased news reports about the state of American men, males are pounced on left and right. And that’s just the beginning.

The war on men actually begins in grade school, where boys are at a distinct disadvantage. Not only are curriculums centered on girls’, rather than boys,’ interests, the emphasis in these grades is on sitting still at a desk.

Plus, many schools have eliminated recess. Such an environment is unhealthy for boys, for they are active by nature and need to run around. And when they can’t sit still teachers and administrators often wrongly attribute their restlessness to ADD or ADHD. The message is clear: boys are just unruly girls.

The truth is, men have become second-class citizens.

Things are no better in college. There, young men face the perils of Title IX, the 1972 law designed to ban sex discrimination in all educational programs.

Under Title IX, the ratio of female athletes is supposed to match the ratio of female students. So if not enough women sign up for, say, wrestling and ice hockey, well then: no more wrestling and ice hockey.

What was once viewed equal opportunity for women has become something else altogether: a demand for equal outcomes. Those are not the same thing at all.

Title IX is also abused when it comes to sex. In 1977, a group of women at Yale used Title IX to claim sexual harassment and violence constitute discrimination against women.

Genuine harassment and violence should be punishable offenses, obviously. But the college campus is a breeding ground for sexual activity, which makes determining wrongdoing (and using Title IX to prove it) extremely difficult. Sexual misconduct does not necessarily constitute harassment—and women have as much of a role to play as men do.

Here again men are in an impossible situation, for there’s an unspoken commandment when it comes to sex in America: thou shalt never blame the woman. If you’re a man who’s sexually involved with a woman and something goes wrong, it’s your fault. Simple as that.

Judith E. Grossman shed light on this phenomenon in a recent Wall Street Journal op-ed. A former feminist, Grossman concedes that in the past she would have expressed “unqualified support” for policies such as Title IX. But that was before her son was charged with “nonconsensual sex” by a former girlfriend.

“Title IX has obliterated the presumption of innocence that is so foundational to our traditions of justice. On today’s college campuses, neither “beyond a reasonable doubt,” nor even the lesser “by clear and convincing evidence” standard of proof, is required to establish guilt of sexual misconduct,” she writes.

When men become husbands and fathers, things get really bad. In family courts throughout America, men are routinely stripped of their rights and due process. The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) is easily used against them since its definition of violence is so broad that virtually any conflict between partners can be considered abuse.

“If a woman gets angry for any reason, she can simply accuse a man and men are just assumed guilty in our society,” notes Dr. Helen Smith, author of the new book, "Men on Strike." This is particularly heinous since, as Smith adds, violence in domestic relations “is almost 50% from men and 50% from women.”

Shocked? If so, that’s in part because the media don’t believe men can be victims of domestic violence—so they don’t report it. They would rather feed off stories that paint women as victims. And in so doing, they’ve convinced America there’s a war on women.

Yet it is males who suffer in our society. From boyhood through adulthood, the White American Male must fight his way through a litany of taunts, assumptions and grievances about his very existence. His oppression is unlike anything American women have faced. Unlike women, however, men don’t organize and form groups when they’ve been persecuted. They just bow out of the game.

America needs to wake up. We have swung the pendulum too far in the other direction—from a man’s world to a woman’s world.

That’s not equality. That’s revenge.





headline: Edward Snowden -- from hero whistleblower to stateless pariah
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Edward Snowden’s plight is becoming a harsh lesson for his admirers and a source of satisfaction for those who see him as a traitor.

Bounced out of a Hong Kong hotel to the bowels of a Moscow airport, the 30-year-old thief of security secrets must be realizing that the best years of his life are behind him. His dreamy quest for whistleblower glory has hit the police-state wall of reality.

Edward Snowden's dreamy quest for whistleblower glory has hit the police-state wall of reality.

Milked as a naive novelty by our adversaries for the damage he did to America, he now has a choice of four unappealing and repressive nations. He can get asylum in Russia if he shuts up, or in Bolivia, Venezuela or Nicaragua — if he can get there. He doesn’t have a passport, and there are no direct flights from Moscow to those countries.

The U.S. bid to bring him back has made Snowden a stateless pariah. It’s not perfect justice, but it will suffice until the day he lands in an American prison for espionage.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Liberal media miss reality in jabs at Lauren Green's interview with 'Zealot' author Aslan
byline: By Dan Gainor


There’s nothing the left likes better than attacking Fox News. Almost all liberal media “analysis” revolves around such activity, without ever noting the outlandishly liberal biases of the traditional outlets that outnumber Fox like the Persians outnumbered the Spartans. Throw in a chance to defend Islam and bash Christians and you get to light up the Internet like a Christmas (or Solstice) tree.

That was the case when Lauren Green, religion correspondent for Fox News (the folks who run this website), interviewed the controversial author of the new book “Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth.” In a Fox News.com Live interview Green dared to ask Reza Aslan, a Muslim who converted to Christianity and then back to Islam, the most obvious of questions:

“Now, I want to clarify: You are a Muslim, so why did you write a book about the founder of Christianity?”

That bolding is important. It’s how The Washington Post’s Erik Wemple handled it in a piece headlined “Fox News must apologize to Reza Aslan.”

Wemple did two pieces attacking Fox on this point, saying they were “stupid and prejudicial questions.” Apparently Wemple needs a refresher course on the Society of Professional Journalists’ Code of Ethics. It states: “The public is entitled to as much information as possible on sources' reliability.”

In the liberal media, one dare not ever question the motives of Muslims.

The heck with that. In the liberal media, one dare not ever question the motives of Muslims. How do we know this? Just ask the Post.

Two months after 9/11, Wemple’s own paper went to an Islamic expert to answer questions for readers on washingtonpost.com. The paper turned to Anwar Al-Awlaki – a man we later discovered was a terrorist so awful that Obama had him killed on sight by a drone armed with Hellfire missiles. In the video, Al-Awlaki criticized “this association between Islam and terrorism.” Now that’s apology worthy.

The Post was really just piling on.

The Daily Beast called it “the interview that’s been burning up the Internet.” Actually, it was only burning up the left side of the Internet until the traditional media followed that lead.

The Huffington Post has written about it around the clock since the interview – with at least six different pieces, including a HuffPo Live segment, and a column calling Green “the Fox News Zealot” and another saying the QA was a “wacky interview.”

My favorite ridiculous HuffPo headline on this was: “Reza Aslan: Speaking Truth to Power.” Aslan’s so-called truth is that Jesus was not the son of God. In HuffPo land, anyone who is Christian is wrong. That is the core of lefty belief.

The rest of the extensive left-wing web – Buzzfeed, Salon, The New Republic, Alternet, etc. – churned the story to make libs fume with anger. That was followed by the traditional media – the Post, New York Times, CNN et al. Aslan whined to Piers Morgan that it was “distasteful” to be asked about his credentials. Morgan, taking a break from his crusade against the Constitution, called the questions “ridiculous.”

During the interview, Aslan called his book “an historical biography of a man named Jesusof Nazareth.It seems to separate him fromthe Christology that arose around him in thegenerations that followed.” Pretty much proving the point that Christian critics have said of his book – that he was supporting the principle tenet of his faith, that Jesus is not divine. Yet he was shocked and complained some felt he was “attacking their faith.” Since that’s exactly what he was doing.

Unsurprisingly, Morgan gave a weak interview, letting Aslan once again get away without significant challenge to his work.

The liberal reaction to Green’s interview is a great example of journalists seeing what they choose to see, not reality. The interview wasn’t her best, but that’s not cause for the media feeding frenzy. The reason so many are after her is that she raised the uncomfortable question about why a Muslim was writing to deny the existence of the Christian faith. Sadly, most journalists did that so long ago that they fail to recognize the story.





Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: My wife's choice, like Angelina Jolie's, is rooted in bravery and courage, not fear
byline: By Erick Erickson


Singer Melissa Etheridge, a breast cancer survivor, recently gave an interview to the Washington Blade. In it, she said actress Angelina Jolie was “fearful,” not “brave,” for having a prophylactic, or preventive, double mastectomy.

Etheridge told the Washington Blade that Jolie “made the most fearful choice you can make when confronting anything with cancer.” She went on to say that she believed cancer “came from inside you and so much of it has to do with the environment of your body.”

Thereafter, she suggested there had been advances in nutrition and stress levels such that Angelina Jolie’s mastectomy was “way down the line on the spectrum of what you can do.”

Jolie and Etheridge both have the BRCA gene, which means they have a very high likelihood of getting breast cancer. Etheridge has had breast cancer. Jolie has not, but has a family history of cancer in addition to the BRCA gene.

"I am offended for . . . all the women who bravely subject themselves to the removal of their breasts because of what might happen."

My wife is another story. My wife tested negative for the BRCA gene. In fact, in several genetic tests my wife showed no genetic indication of cancer. But her mother, mother’s sister, grandmother, and other relatives all had breast cancer. Both her mother and aunt died. Her aunt underwent a prophylactic mastectomy, but later developed lung cancer, which the doctors believed had spread from her breasts. My wife’s mother had very aggressive breast cancer that was detected early, but still proved fatal. Only her grandmother survived a fight with breast cancer.

Facing a family history, but negative genetic tests, my wife and I battled insurance until they agreed she could have a double mastectomy. Three months after our marriage, my wife had the surgery. I did not realize what women facing that surgery go through. Not just the interior tissue is removed, but the exterior tissue is too. Tattoos are typically then used to recreate the exterior appearance with implants to replace the interior tissue.

My wife’s reconstruction could not follow immediately after the surgery. Too much internal damage had been done and she needed to heal. For several days after she came home I would physically have to lift her from the bed in the mornings. She had no upper body strength. Each week I would leave my law practice early and make the 90-minute drive to her doctor’s office. They would stick her with a needle, slowly injecting saline into empty “expanders” left where the breast tissue had been.

Some weeks the pain would cause her to throw up. Every week I’d drive her home, put her in bed, and let her recover. During a span of six months, her chest area slowly expanded and stretched for reconstructive surgery. Unfortunately, my wife’s reconstruction did not go as planned. It took multiple reconstructions, with another after our first child was born five years later.

The experience was exhausting for me and grueling for her. Knowing what she went through and what Angelina Jolie went through, I am offended for them both and all the other women who bravely subject themselves to the removal of their breasts because of what might happen.

Contrary to Melissa Etheridge, there is no science that shows reducing stress or changing a diet may prevent breast cancer. The only guaranteed way for many women is to have a prophylactic double mastectomy and then wonder for years after “what if” — what if they went through all of that and did not have to, what if some cure came along causing it to be unnecessary, what if their children would look at them differently, what if their husbands would too, what if . . . the list goes on.

There is a level of bravery and courage subjecting yourself to a torturous process to avoid what many may consider only a chance of cancer. But having seen loved ones wither and die having not made that choice, for many women it is a far wiser course of action. It takes great bravery to undergo surgery in the shadow of an unknown future.

My wife is my hero. She is the bravest, most courageous person I know. She is also a great fan of Angelina Jolie’s. On the day Angelina Jolie announced her own mastectomy, I took a copy of the article to my wife, laid it in front of her, and told her now she had more than tattoos in common with Angelina Jolie. Like Angelina Jolie now, through her platform as a highly regarded celebrity, my very private wife for years since her surgery has had a ministry of her own, letting other women ask all the questions to her she never had anyone to ask about this issue.

I feel sorry for Melissa Etheridge, who not only seems to have fallen for pseudo-science in the prevention of cancer, but does not recognize the courage and bravery of women who make life and body altering decisions to ensure they have long lives free of the cancer that robbed them of their own mothers, sisters and friends. Fear played no role in my wife’s decision or in Angelina Jolie’s decision. Genetics, family history, and probability helped them make their choice.

It would be a shame if Melissa Etheridge’s comments caused other women, now having the doubts my wife had before her surgery, to second-guess a decision that could save their lives.





headline: What Pope Francis really said about gays -- and no, it's not new
byline: By Fr. Jonathan Morris


Pope Francis doesn’t do interviews. Or at least that’s what we thought. He said that about himself just one week ago on the way to Rio de Janeiro for World Youth Day. 

Then World Youth Day happened. And it happened in a big way. 

According to official reports from City Hall, 3.2 million young people gathered on Copacabana Beach to see him, pray with him, and hear his proposal about the meaning of life.

The Bible and the Catholic Church have never taught that it is a “sin” to be homosexual.

His closing message to them was simple: Go back to your homes, and serve others without fear.

Hours later, perhaps taking to heart his own closing message about fearless service, Pope Francis offered an 80 minute, unscripted question-and-answer session with the international press corps.

In its entirely, the press conference on the pope’s plane traveling from Brazil back to the Vatican was fascinating. (For more, please look at my Twitter reports.)

But, unfortunately, if you were reading the headlines from some media outlets, you would have learned just one thing.As the Huffington Post put it: “Breakthrough: Pope OK with Gays.”

This is the worst coverage of a religious story I have seen to date.

Let’s begin with the fact that the pope has always been “OK” with homosexuals. In fact, by the demands of his own religion he is required to be much more than just “OK.” The Christian faith teaches that every person is endowed by God with an inviolable dignity and therefore deserves our unconditional respect and love.

A section of an Associated Press report also got the story very wrong. Summarizing the pope’s comments on homosexuals in the priesthood, the AP reported: “Francis was much more conciliatory [than Pope Benedict], saying gay clergymen should be forgiven and their sins forgotten.”

Pope Francis didn’t say that, and the report is wrong on so many levels.

First of all, it suggests that being gay itself, is a sin.What Pope Francis really said, in response to a reporter’s question about homosexual priests who are living a celibate life was this: “If someone is gay and he searches for the Lord and has good will, who am I to judge?”

Pope Francis simply and compassionately reiterated Biblical teaching.The Bible and the Catholic Church have never taught that it is a “sin” to be homosexual. They teach it is a sin to have homosexual sex because it goes against the laws of God’s nature, specifically his plan for human sexuality. 

When Pope Francis says “who am I to judge” he is saying—and I think we need to hear more of this from religious leaders—that active homosexuals deserve the same kindness, love, and mercy that all of us sinners would hope to receive from God and from others.

We don’t make judgments about anyone’s personal worth—God has already done that when he created us out of love.

I would hope next time Pope Francis offers to meet with the press, they would take to heart his message about fearless service and report to their readers what he actually said, rather than what they wish they had heard.





headline: Hillary Clinton -- supporting  early childhood education through public-private partnerships
byline: By Lanny Davis


Last week I wrote about Hillary Clinton’s June 13 speech at the Clinton Global Initiative (CGI) meeting in Chicago, describing her ability to place the issue of opportunities for women and girls in a broader context than women’s rights — showing its relevance to prosperity for all, men included.

She did the same with respect to the other two issues she spoke to in her speech — early childhood education development and job-creating economic development — indeed, treating them as virtually one and the same. Once again, she relied on compelling facts:

- In the U.S. only 50 percent of our children receive any early childhood education, much of it the wealthier half, compared to China’s goal of providing three years of early learning for 70 percent by 2020.

Ideas, innovations, partnerships and public service are all part of the ethics and values that have become a way of life for Hillary Clinton.

- The first five years of life have a dramatic effect on later adult development. Seven hundred new neural connections are formed every second, laying the foundation for the learning, behavior and health we need to grow up as productive adults.

- According to pioneering research by Nobel-prize winning economist James Heckman of the University of Chicago, our nation saves seven dollars during a child’s lifetime for every dollar we invest now in early childhood education. Those savings are measured by higher high school graduation rates, greater likelihood of future employment, lower expenditures for special education, lower incarceration rates and a reduction of other social ills.

At the CGI meeting, Clinton launched a new partnership called “Too Small to Fail” to promote the latest brain development research and help parents to take steps to improve the health and well-being of children in their first five years. It will also work with businesses on expanding flexibility and support of young children.

Clinton clearly articulated her belief in the importance of public-private partnerships as “one of the most important problem-solving tools.” And during her speech, she offered a prime and very specific example: Mr. J. B. Pritzker, a leading member of the world-famous business and philanthropic Pritzker family of Chicago, who had announced at the CGI conference the issuance of “Social Impact Bonds” to finance pre-school education programs for at-risk children.

Such bonds are a new tool, sometimes called "results-based financing," that use private capital to achieve positive social outcomes, generating modest financial returns for private investors while simultaneously generating much greater returns in the form of cost savings for cash-strapped state and local governments.

Pritzker announced at the conference a partnership with the investment bank Goldman Sachs to invest $7 million to fund the expansion of a successful pre-school program that reduces the need for special education at Granite District in Salt Lake City, Utah. Over several years, the new financing will benefit more than 3,500 children and save taxpayers millions of dollars.

The bonds in which Pritzker and Goldman Sachs are investing will be repaid by the school districts only out of actual cost savings in special education, which are significant.

Data from a study conducted in 2006-09 demonstrated that 33 percent of low-income kindergarten students would have needed costly special education services paid for by taxpayers. But after participating in the District’s pre-school program, 95 percent of these children no longer needed special education, saving taxpayers more than $2,600 per child each year for 12 years. Heckman, the award-winning economist, would say there are even bigger savings to taxpayers, which aren’t even calculated in these numbers.

Pritzker and Goldman Sachs will see a return on their bonds only to the extent that the projected cost savings in special education actually occur. In other words, all the risk is theirs, not the taxpayers’ or the school district’s.

This is why Clinton took such pains to thank Pritzker during her CGI America speech and to praise his innovative investment in the Social Impact Bonds for early childhood education. She sees this as an important paradigm for “doing good while doing well,” using the public-private partnership mechanism.

If it can work in Salt Lake, she and Pritzker reason, it can work elsewhere — not only for early childhood education but in other areas of great social needs facing America.

Ideas, innovations, partnerships and public service are all part of the ethics and values that have become a way of life for Hillary Clinton since I first met her in law school more than 42 years ago. And this is why, regardless of whether she seeks higher office in the future, she will certainly make an important contribution to the public good in the months and years ahead.





headline: What would George Washington say about the US now?
byline: By Logan Beirne


We have strayed from the path our Founders forged 237 years ago. Under the Constitutional Republic they created after the Revolutionary War, the United States has prospered over the centuries beyond the founding generation’s wildest dreams; however, we are wandering further from those very Constitutional principles that enabled us to thrive. 

Our Founders developed an ingenious system of checks and balances, which George Washington described as, “though not absolutely perfect, it is one of the best in the world.” This government “by the people, for the people,” empowered the citizenry to select representatives that would unite the nation’s factions while protecting those liberties so many died to defend.

But over the years, power has shifted from the local level to the federal government, where bitter partisanship clogs the mechanisms of that ingenious system by which we might begin to repair.

If history is a guide, George Washington would not give up on our Constitutional Republic now – he would fight to return it to its proper functioning.

If history is a guide, Washington would not give up on our Constitutional Republic now – he would fight to return it to its proper functioning. And he would begin by rallying the electorate. As he did during his time, he would extol us to replace wayward politicians with leaders who will act in the best interests of the country instead of their party. 

The evils of modern politics were foreshadowed by the prescient words of the founding generation.

Washington, our nation’s first and only president with no declared party allegiance, was perhaps the most weary of the harms caused by uncompromising political factions.

With the ink on the Constitution barely dry, the nation fractured into competitive political parties.
President Washington derided these factions as “[a] fire not to be quenched, . . . demand[ing] a uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame, lest, instead of warming, it should consume.” He believed that they “agitate[d] the community with ill-founded jealousies and false alarms, kindl[ing] the animosity of one part against another.”

Fortuitously, Washington prescribed how we might fight that fire: “by force of public opinion.”

James Madison echoed this sentiment in Federalist 10, where he suggested we might cure our partisan ills via an engaged electorate who diligently watch their leaders.

Our Founders charged us, the public, with the responsibility to elect those representatives that will rightfully uphold our Constitution – and reject those who place their own power and parties over the good of the nation. And what if we cannot find any good candidates? Run for office. It is our civic duty.

On this July Fourth, we find ourselves in a great country that is mired by politicians who seem to expend more resources fighting one another than adhering to our Constitution.

The United States government was never meant to be a “team sport” of Democrats vs. Republicans.

Our forward thinking Founders have gifted us with advice from the grave: we must beat back the partisanship with our votes and civic involvement, and install principled leaders, as our Founders were.

If we are to lead our nation towards those core Constitutional principles that have enabled us to prosper, we do so “by force of public opinion.”

“The foundation of our Empire was not laid in the gloomy age of Ignorance and Superstition, but at an Epocha when the rights of mankind were better understood and more clearly defined,” Washington wrote in 1783, “At this auspicious period, the United States came into existence as a Nation, and if their Citizens should not be completely free and happy, the fault will be entirely their own.”





headline: Same-sex marriage decisions beg question, should America's new motto be 'in polls we trust'?
byline: By Cal Thomas


"For this reason a man shall leave his father and his mother, and be joined to his wife; and they shall become one flesh." -- Genesis 2:24, NIV

The problem for people who believe in an Authority higher even than the Constitution is that in our increasingly secular and indifferent society it has become more difficult to persuade those who do not subscribe to an immutable standard to accept that view.

It is nearly impossible to restrain a people intent on throwing off any and all restraints.

History is full of examples of empires that collapsed from within before they were conquered from without.

The Supreme Court has narrowly, but effectively, removed another standard on the way to full acceptance of its right to redefine marriage and raise itself to a level higher than the Creator.

While the Supreme Court's 5-4 decision overturning the Defense of Marriage Act does not establish a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, that's where it seems headed.

What or who is to stop them? Various religious-political groups formed over many years to confront cultural erosion are in retreat and increasingly ineffective.

Modern courts might have trouble with Thomas Jefferson's declaration, "We hold these truths to be self-evident." Is there anything that is self-evident today and not subject to challenge given the right circumstances?

Even a secular person should be required to answer a question before removing such an important cultural underpinning as traditional marriage: If marriage is no longer to be reserved for one man and one woman, as it has for millennia in many different cultures and religions, what is the new standard and on what is it based? Should we change America's motto to "in polls we trust"?

The New York Times recently editorialized in favor of transgender rights.

Polygamist groups have made it known they wish to be next in line to enjoy full constitutional protection for their lifestyle. Utah was forced to outlaw polygamy before admission to the Union. Can it, should it, revert to its previous practice and who has the authority to say "no"?

There are people who favor sex and marriage between adults and children. On what basis should they be denied their "right to happiness"?

Today's "that goes too far" easily becomes tomorrow's "right" with a morally vacuous media leading the charge and a morally exhausted people who are afraid to say "stop," for fear they'll be labeled "bigots."

Boundaries serve a purpose, in sport and in life. Fences keep out trespassers and protect children on playgrounds. Governments impose speed limits. Lines define a football field.

The problem faced by moral-political forces -- from Prohibition, to abortion and now same-sex marriage -- is that they are confronted by growing numbers of people who do not believe in, or can be persuaded by, ancient, even biblical, instruction constraining human behavior.

Many young people whose parents are divorced, or who are cohabiting without marriage, are not influenced by such commands or "preaching."

While the Supreme Court's 5-4 decision overturning the Defense of Marriage Act does not establish a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, that's where it seems headed. Justice Antonin Scalia predicted it would a decade ago when the Supreme Court invalidated laws prohibiting homosexual conduct in Lawrence v. Texas.

One doesn't have to approve of the Court's "reasoning" in order to hand it to the gay rights campaigners. They have done a magnificent job advancing their objectives, but they couldn't have done it alone.

A verse from the Old Testament warns about the detrimental effects such "advances" can have on individuals and nations that abandon moral boundaries: "In those days Israel had no king; everyone did what was right in his own eyes." -- Judges 17:6, NIV



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Egypt's Islamists still not ready for democracy
byline: By Cal Thomas


The military coup that ousted Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi marks another failure in U.S. foreign policy over several administrations, which have erroneously promoted the notion that American-style democracy in Islamic lands will produce a nation more like ours.

The Founders wrote a Constitution. When properly read and obeyed, it guards against pure democracy and makes "we the people" subject to laws that cannot be abolished by popular vote. Benjamin Franklin properly called what the Founders wrought a "Republic."

Representative government would guard against the passions of a majority. No such safeguards apply in Egypt, or for that matter throughout most of the Islamic world.

Definitions are important. To a radical Islamist, Sharia law defines freedom.

George W. Bush famously said that freedom beats in every human heart. To paraphrase Bill Clinton, it depends on the meaning of freedom.

Definitions are important. To a radical Islamist, Sharia law defines freedom. Constitutions guaranteeing equal rights for all, including religious minorities like Coptic Christians in Egypt, multiple parties and free speech are mostly absent from societies where Islamists rule. And so majorities, often followed by the mob, and then the army, rule.

Secretary of State John Kerry spent most of his recent visit to the Middle East focusing on the establishment of a Palestinian state. This failed policy is a sideshow and irrelevant to the turmoil throughout the region.

The Obama administration is calling for an "inclusive" political process in Egypt, which would include a role for the Muslim Brotherhood. But the Muslim Brotherhood's radical religious outlook and earthly agenda are the problem, not the solution. Why should the United States expect a different government if a different "brother" is elected, or if Morsi is somehow re-instated?

How can Egypt have a stable government when the Brotherhood claims to be doing the will of God at the same time the military says it carried out God's will by removing Morsi and secularists say they don't want Islamists governing Egypt?

Writing in The UK's Daily Telegraph, Fraser Nelson, editor of The Spectator, says the Arab world needs capitalism, more than democracy. He suggests that Western aid to Egypt be conditioned upon property rights. Throughout the Arab world, he writes, bureaucracy and corruption keep many people from starting businesses without paying costly bribes: "...under Hosni Mubarak, for example, opening a small bakery in Cairo took more than 500 days of bureaucracy.

To open a business in Egypt means dealing with 29 government agencies. The same story is true throughout the region: The average Arab needs to present four dozen documents and endure two years of red tape to become the legal owner of land or business. If you don't have the time or money for this, you are condemned to life in the black market: No matter how good you are, you will never trade your way out of poverty."

The right to own property was fundamental to America's founding. In the beginning, only white male property owners were allowed to vote. Discriminatory, yes, but the point about the importance of being invested in the new nation by literally owning a piece of it was thought to be a fundamental component of citizenship.

American policy in the Middle East has failed over many decades because of false assumptions, especially when it comes to Israel. While often treating that tiny land as a weed that ought to be dug up, rather than a flower in the desert to be nourished, U.S. policy has focused on placating Arabs and Muslims, many of whom wish to destroy Israel and America.

Perhaps now that the United States is rapidly headed toward energy independence (enhanced if the opposition to the Keystone pipeline and fracking can be overcome), this and future administrations won't feel the need to bow to Middle East dictators and will push a "re-set" button that has a better chance at succeeding than the one that for too long has been stuck and inoperative.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: After Asiana Airlines crash, should you fear flying?
byline: By Dr. Marc Siegel


One can only imagine what it must have felt like to be a passenger on an international flight for over 10 hours, to feel the aircraft at last coming in for a landing at San Francisco International Airport only to come up short, then to experience parts of the plane coming off and bursting into flames as you struggled to get out alive.

When I spoke with Dr. Chris Barton, Chief of Emergency Medicine at San Francisco General Hospital (where more than 50 of the survivors were brought for emergency treatment after the crash), he told me that "we saw ‘a lot’ of spinal injuries… probably from the axial loading of the plane slamming the ground – twice. A lot of facial bruising and forehead contusions – probably from the heads hitting the seat back in front of them."

What a frightening and horrific event for the passengers and their families. Even as their bodies heal most, if not all, will still be faced with nightmares, panic attacks, flashbacks, and other symptoms of post-traumatic stress for months after the crash, if not for the rest of their lives.

We are no more likely to get into a plane crash today then we were yesterday, even if it feels like our odds have changed.

And what about the rest of us -- those who watched the horrific images of the crash over and over on the news?

Will we now over-personalize the risk of flying?

Will we attach ourselves voyeuristically to the 24-hour-news reports and fear for our own safety?

Will we be poor role models for our children; extending our unease to them?

If we prepare in advance for possible plane crashes by wearing pants and sneakers and memorizing the emergency exits whenever we get on a plane, won’t we in fact be telling ourselves that an extremely rare event is actually about to happen?

Yet, as incredible as it sounds, we are no more likely to get into a plane crash today then we were yesterday, even if it feels like our odds have changed.

Most of us are afraid of flying to begin with. Flying by its nature scares us because it involved travelling 30,000 feet above the ground at hundreds of miles per hour and relinquishing control over our lives to a strange pilot we've never before met. The news that the pilot who crashed the plane at San Francisco did not have much experience flying a Boeing 777 certainly doesn't reassure us, though this was another extremely rare event.

Fear is a very powerful, contagious emotion especially the fear of death, but the facts remain on the side of air flight safety.

The number of deaths on U.S. highways in a year is typically more than 40,000, which is more than double the entire number of people who have died in commercial airplanes over the past half century. So if fear of flying leads you to forego air travel and drive to your destination instead, your chances of dying in an accident increase dramatically.

It is certainly understandable, if not entirely rational, that people across America are afraid to fly today. Over time this fear will extinguish itself, even as the roving eye of the news media moves on to the next disaster and we become afraid of that kind of an event instead.

What if I told you that courage and laughter flow through the same emotional centers of the brain as fear? If instead of giving in to our worry, how about if we learn to laugh at ourselves, and then show the courage we need to get on the next plane.

Over time, the courage to fly can cure the fear of flying. I can’t guarantee it in all cases, but it is my prescription for today.





headline: ObamaCare turns one -- here's what America still needs to know
byline: By Toby Cosgrove, M.D.


When the Supreme Court deemed the Affordable Care Act constitutional one year ago, it was a monumental moment in our nation’s history.

It meant that essential, historic reform of the American health care system would move forward. It meant guaranteed health care access for millions of Americans who hadn’t had access before.

It meant a re-energized focus on medical quality and the development of a more efficient health care delivery system.

Collectively, we must all take responsibility for the cost of health care by losing weight, eating healthier and quitting smoking.

Twelve months after the court’s decision, though, there are still more questions than answers.

Will insurance exchange programs be up and running by the due date? Will Americans understand these exchanges, what they will cover, and how to enroll? Will states expand Medicaid, as encouraged by the ACA? And what impact will the ACA have on hospitals, the economy and jobs?

One of the few certainties at this point is that reimbursement for medical services will decrease. health care providers will be paid less to deliver more care.

Our challenge is to find ways to work more efficiently and decrease costs, while continuing to deliver high quality care.

With implementation of the ACA, hospitals face some relief but also new pressures. Expanding health insurance to about 30 million more Americans will mean hospitals won’t have to shoulder as much of the cost of caring for the uninsured. However, all of those additional patients will need thousands more physicians than are working now.

The ACA does take some steps toward driving down health spending; for example, it will stop reimbursing hospitals for preventable re-admissions, creating a financial incentive for doctors to get treatment right the first time.

That’s certainly a start, but with a growing elderly population and a still-recovering economy, more needs to be done.

Specifically, four items should be at the top of the list – Medicaid expansion, hospital consolidation, salaried physicians and obesity. Here's more:

- Medicaid expansion was expected to cover 17 million uninsured Americans, but states can opt out.

In Ohio, the coverage of 275,000 low-income, uninsured Ohioans is at risk as politicians argue that Medicaid expansion would strain the state budget or expand the government’s role in health care.

That is simply wrong -- medically, economically and morally -- if we as a country believe that all Americans should have access to health insurance.

- Consolidation will be a growing trend in health care as providers look for ways to draw on each other’s resources and expertise.

Technological advances have become too expensive for all hospitals to be all things to all people. Instead, hospitals will come together to form networks of care, with certain hospitals acting as centers of excellence.

- Physicians should be salaried, not paid on a per-procedure or per-patient basis.

At Cleveland Clinic, all doctors are salaried employees of the hospital. They are paid the same, regardless of how many tests they order or how many surgeries they perform. The intent is not to get a bigger paycheck but to do what’s best for the patient.

- By 2020, half of all Americans are likely to suffer from one or more chronic diseases, a majority of them weight-related.

The ACA does not address this issue, but we simply cannot control health care spending without addressing Americans' weight.

We have to create incentives to keep people healthy, through programs that encourage wellness and prevention. When people are healthy, health care costs go down.

This is a time of unprecedented transformation in health care. We’ve truly entered a “new normal” in health care, and everyone is working quickly to adapt.

However, this isn’t a topic to be dealt with by health care providers alone. Collectively, we must all take responsibility for the cost of health care in this country by losing weight, eating healthier and quitting smoking. After all, the state of our nation is only as good as the state of our health.





headline: Anthony Weiner's wife Huma Abedin isn't 'brave,' she's self-serving
byline: By Monica Crowley


While New Yorkers---and the rest of the nation---are having a hearty chuckle about Anthony Weiner and his latest psychodrama involving his nether regions, college-age women, and his porn alter ego, “Carlos Danger,” many are missing the central issue.

This spectacle is not about Weiner’s weiner. It’s about power. Getting it, keeping it, building it, leveraging it. This is why Weiner is running for Mayor of New York City---and why his wife, Huma Abedin---has joined him in perpetuating and compounding the lies told to the public while standing by her man.

This spectacle is not about Weiner’s weiner. It’s about power. Getting it, keeping it, building it, leveraging it.

Since resigning from Congress in disgrace in 2011 after his first sexting scandal was exposed by the fearless truth-seeker, the late Andrew Breitbart, Weiner and Abedin sat for lengthy, glowing profiles in The New York Times magazine, New York, and People, in which they waxed rhapsodic about his changed nature while posing for “happy family” portraits. It was all a lie then, and Abedin knew it. “We discussed all of this before Anthony decided to run for mayor,” she said on Tuesday, as she stood next to him, pretending to look sad and disappointed. The next day she was photographed in a super-cute dress and kitten heels while laughing on her cell phone. Hardly the picture of the shocked, betrayed wife.

When a male politician is caught in a sex scandal (which always raises other issues of lying, hypocrisy, and poor---if any---judgment), his spouse usually must choose between the Hillary Clinton model or the Jenny Sanford model.

In the Hillary Clinton model, the wife chooses to support the straying husband while wearing a distressed and presumably pained expression in public.She stays in the marriage as a way to serve both her personal ambition as well as their shared ambition to achieve ever-greater positions of power and influence.

In the Jenny Sanford model, the wife rejects doormat status and chooses instead distance, separation, and often, divorce. For her, empowerment and self-restoration are tied not to the achievement of external influence but to personal dignity and self-respect.

It’s no surprise that Abedin, who has served as Clinton’s closest adviser and aide for nearly two decades, would follow her mentor’s example. Suck it up in public, resist any sudden moves, and signal to the public that they should take their cues from you: if you’ve forgiven him and looked past it, so should they. And often, that strategy works. Of course, these women wished that their men had stuck to the rules of the deal: do whatever you want, just be discreet and don’t humiliate me. When the inevitable humiliation occurs, they’ve got to go to Plan B. The Hillary Clinton model.

In service to the overarching goal, Huma, like Hillary before her, has downplayed her own intellect, abilities, accomplishments, and pride in order to keep her wagon hitched to a deeply troubled man. Is this modern feminism? Hey National Organization for Women and Gloria Steinem: is this what you fought for? Just curious.

Standing by men who had committed appalling acts of deceit, betrayal and disrespect used to be a sign of Stepford Wife weakness. Proud, strong, independent women left these kinds of losers. I am woman, hear me roar! And buh-bye!

But once prominent women on the Left began sticking around, starting with Hillary Clinton, the feminists changed their tune. “Brave” was how Andrea Mitchell and Mika Brzezinski described Abedin’s choice on MSNBC. Abedin’s choice wasn’t brave. It was purely self-serving. Remember: she and Weiner have an infant son together, yet she continues to allow that child to live under the same roof as a very sick individual, endangering the child’s life. She would have been truly brave had she packed up her son and left, without knowing what the future would bring but knowing that it had to be safer and more stable than her current situation.

No, what Abedin has chosen to do has nothing to do with being brave and everything to do with rebuilding the power center she once shared with her former Congressman husband. After all, she needs a way-station until her boss becomes president. After that, all bets are off. Power-seekers go with the most powerful. President trumps Mayor, but being first lady of New York would certainly be a lovely way to spend a few years.





headline: Morgan Lake's story dramatic reminder that God is real, miracles happen
byline: By Kelly Wright


"Miracles happen everyday, change your perception of what a miracle is and you'll see them all around you." -- Jon Bon Jovi

If rock stars can believe in miracles, so can you.

Man looks at the outward appearance but God looks on the inside -- the heart of the matter.

We should change our perception so we acknowledge miracles.

It's a common problem in the media. Some news organizations distance themselves from any reference to God, Jesus, or miracles, even when it’s germane to the story.

Such is the case with Morgan Lake whose car plunged 40 feet off Maryland's Chesapeake Bay Bridge into the water below. Incredibly, Morgan managed to survive the horrifying ordeal. Many news outlets have reported her dramatic escape from death after her car but her mother explained to me, when I met both of them Tuesday, that some of those stations and networks deleted Morgan's words of gratitude to God.

During my interview with Morgan, she emphasized that she wanted the whole story told. She wanted me to let you know how God's supernatural power gave her superhuman strength to break free from a watery grave. So, here's the rest of the story.

In this age of cynicism and abandonment of faith, Morgan's story is a dramatic reminder that God is real.

Morgan Lake of Dunkirk, Maryland is a vibrant and enthusiastic young woman. The 22-year-old college student is majoring in communications. She dreams of becoming a Sports anchor or host of a television show. Morgan also teaches gymnastics and cheerleading to young girls.

Morgan is the kind of young woman that makes people feel good about life. She always seeks to provide people with encouragement and inspiration.

That’s how Morgan lives, loving God and loving people.

On Friday, July 18 at 8 p.m., Morgan was enjoying one of her best days ever. Everything was just going her way.

It is a day that she will never forget.

Early evening along the Chesapeake Bay can be a wonderful time of day, especially when the sun is just beginning to set; it’s simply beautiful.

As Morgan was driving across the Chesapeake Bay Bridge, she was feeling the euphoria of having one of those spectacular moments in time. Then suddenly...calamity struck.

It all happened in an instant, in a blink of an eye, but it felt like an eternity.

Morgan had slowed her car to a stop on the bridge for a toll. In her rear view mirror, as she blinked her eyes, she could see a large tractor trailer truck approaching.

As she blinked her eyes again as the truck showed no sign of slowing down. After the third blink of her eyes…Bam!

Morgan heard the thunderous crashing as the truck rammed into the rear of her car. The momentum of the truck began pushing Morgan’s car forward. She could see the jersey wall and the water below.

Her mind was frantically racing with thoughts and prayers for her car to stop on the bridge. Please, don’t go over this bridge into the water, she thought. Morgan felt helpless and she reasoned in her mind, “this is it! I’m going to die!”

There was no way of escape. Morgan’s car was jerked like a rollercoaster. Her greatest fear soon became a reality.

After being pushed along, on the top of the barrier between the bridge and the water, Morgan’s car was now plunging into the treacherous waters below. As the car quickly submerged beneath the water’s surface, fear and panic gripped Morgan.

Her seatbelt was locked and would not open, her arms were now flailing about, and her mouth and body were filling up with water.

Morgan says; “I started to feel the drowning sensation. I didn’t like how it felt.” With that, she felt a rush of hope as she told herself; “I’m not going out this way -- I’m not dying.”

Then suddenly... fortune struck.

Morgan says in that moment of defying death she reached out to God. And she claims God turned her situation around; “I just felt as if God touched my shoulder and pushed me back against my car into my seat to relax me.”

Morgan says that divine intervention allowed her to unlock her seat belt and then pull herself out of the driver side window, swim to the surface, then swimming to shore where help arrived.

Morgan’s story is being told all around the world. It is being described as a modern day miracle.

Morgan explained to me that she knows some people don’t believe in God. But now, she says; “They can look at me. They can look at the video of the bridge and my car being pulled from the water.”

Morgan adds; “As long as you have God with you, he will be there to support you through everything; even going over a bridge.”

In this age of cynicism and abandonment of faith, Morgan’s story is a dramatic reminder that God is real. Miracles happen every day; they’re just not reported.

If you doubt it, just take a look in the mirror. You’re a miracle, a work of art, and a masterpiece of God-your creator.

Morgan's family is strong on faith, hope and love. One of the family's favorite scriptures that applies to Morgan's near death experience is taken from the book of Numbers, chapter 14-verse 17; “Now may the Lord’s strength be displayed, just as you have declared."

Morgan, keep declaring it!

Some people find it easy to give up or quit when they face difficult situations. Morgan’s story is an example about overcoming tremendous adversity through faith in God.

Your frightening ordeal may not be a bridge over troubled waters. But suddenly, you could be going through something that causes you to fear or to doubt. It could be unemployment, foreclosure, bankruptcy, sickness, or more.

Just know that while we all experience setbacks, God suddenly shows up to turn our setbacks into setups for a comeback.

So, follow Morgan’s example; starve your fear and feed your faith. Your soul will be greatly satisfied in knowing that something good is going to happen to you. Live your life expecting miracles. Change your perception; they’re all around you.





headline: Read an excerpt from 'Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth'
byline: By Reza Aslan


Editor's note: The following is an excerpt from Reza Aslan's new book, "Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth."

When I was fifteen years old, I found Jesus.

I spent the summer of my sophomore year at an evangelical youth camp in Northern California, a place of timbered fields and boundless blue skies, where, given enough time and stillness and soft-spoken encouragement, one could not help but hear the voice of God. Amidst the man-made lakes and majestic pines my friends and I sang songs, played games, and swapped secrets, rollicking in our freedom from the pressures of home and school. In the evenings, we gathered in a fire-lit assembly hall at the center of the camp. It was there that I heard a remarkable story that would change my life forever.

Two thousand years ago, I was told, in an ancient land called Galilee, the God of heaven and earth was born in the form of a helpless child. The child grew into a blameless man. The man became the Christ, the savior of humanity. Through his words and miraculous deeds, he challenged the Jews who thought they were the chosen of God, and in return the Jews had him nailed to a cross. Though he could have saved himself from that gruesome death, he freely chose to die. Indeed, his death was the point of it all, for his sacrifice freed us all from the burden of our sins. But the story did not end there, because three days later, he rose again, exalted and divine, so that now, all who believe in him and accept him into their hearts will also never die, but have eternal life.

Two decades of rigorous academic research into the origins of Christianity has made me a more genuinely committed disciple of Jesus of Nazareth than I ever was of Jesus Christ.

For a kid raised in a motley family of lukewarm Muslims and exuberant atheists, this was truly the greatest story ever told. Never before had I felt so intimately the pull of God. In Iran, the place of my birth, I was Muslim in much the way I was Persian. My religion and my ethnicity were mutual and linked. Like most people born into a religious tradition, my faith was as familiar to me as my skin, and just as disregardable. After the Iranian revolution forced my family to flee our home, religion in general, and Islam in particular, became taboo in our household. Islam was shorthand for everything we had lost to the mullahs who now ruled Iran. My mother still prayed when no one was looking, and you could still find a stray Quran or two hidden in a closet or a drawer somewhere. But, for the most part, our lives were scrubbed of all trace of God.

That was just fine with me. After all, in the America of the 1980s, being Muslim was like being a spaceman. My faith was a bruise, the most obvious symbol of my otherness; it needed to be concealed.

Jesus, on the other hand, was America. He was the central figure in America’s national drama. Accepting him into my heart was as close as I could get to feeling truly American. I do not mean to say that mine was a conversion of convenience. On the contrary, I burned with absolute devotion to my newfound faith. I was presented with a Jesus who was less “Lord and Savior” than he was a best friend, someone with whom I could have a deep and personal relationship. As a teenager trying to make sense of an indeterminate world I had only just become aware of, this was an invitation I could not refuse.

The moment I returned home from camp, I began eagerly to share the good news of Jesus Christ with my friends and family, my neighbors and classmates, with people I’d just met and with strangers on the street: those who heard it gladly, and those who threw it back in my face. Yet something unexpected happened in my quest to save the souls of the world. The more I probed the Bible to arm myself against the doubts of unbelievers, the more distance I discovered between the Jesus of the gospels and the Jesus of history – between Jesus the Christ and Jesus of Nazareth. In college, where I began my formal study of the history of religions, that initial discomfort soon ballooned into full-blown doubts of my own.

The bedrock of evangelical Christianity, at least as it was taught to me, is the unconditional belief that every word of the Bible is God-breathed and true, literal and inerrant. The sudden realization that this belief is patently and irrefutably false, that the Bible is replete with the most blatant and obvious errors and contradictions—just as one would expect from a document written by hundreds of different hands across thousands of years—left me confused and spiritual unmoored. And so, like many people in my situation, I angrily discarded my faith as if it were a costly forgery I had been duped into buying. I began to rethink the faith and culture of my forefathers, finding in them as an adult a deeper, more intimate familiarity than I ever had as a child, the kind that comes from reconnecting with an old friend after many years apart.

Meanwhile, I continued my academic work in religious studies, delving back into the Bible not as an unquestioning believer but as an inquisitive scholar. No longer chained to the assumption that the stories I read were literally true, I became aware of a more meaningful truth in the text, a truth intentionally detached from the exigencies of history. Ironically, the more I learned about the life of the historical Jesus, the turbulent world in which he lived, and the brutality of the Roman occupation that he defied, the more I was drawn to him. Indeed, the Jewish peasant and revolutionary who challenged the rule of the most powerful empire the world had ever known and lost became so much more real to me than the detached, unearthly being I had been introduced to in church.

Today, I can confidently say that two decades of rigorous academic research into the origins of Christianity has made me a more genuinely committed disciple of Jesus of Nazareth than I ever was of Jesus Christ. My hope with this book is to spread the good news of the Jesus of history with the same fervor that I once applied to spreading the story of the Christ.

There are a few things to keep in mind before we begin our examination of the Jesus of history. For every well-attested, heavily researched, and eminently authoritative argument made about the historical Jesus, there is an equally well-attested, equally researched, and equally authoritative argument opposing it. Rather than burden the reader with the centuries-long debate about the life and mission of Jesus of Nazareth, I have constructed my narrative upon what I believe to be the most accurate and reasonable argument, based on my two decades of scholarly research into the New Testament and early Christian history. For those interested in the debate, I have exhaustively detailed my research and, whenever possible, provided the arguments of those who disagree with my interpretation in the lengthy notes section at the end of this book.

All Greek translations of the New Testament are my own (with a little help from my friends Liddell and Scott). In those few cases in which I do not directly translate a passage of the New Testament, I rely on the translation provided by the New Revised Standard Version of the Bible. All Hebrew and Aramaic translations are provided by Dr. Ian C. Werrett, associate professor of religious studies at St. Martin’s University.

Throughout the text, all references to the Q source material will be marked thus: (Matthew | Luke), with the order of the books indicating which gospel I am most directly quoting. The reader will notice that I rely primarily on the gospel of Mark and the Q material in forming my outline of the story of Jesus. That is because these are the earliest and thus most reliable sources available to us about the life of the Nazarean. In general I have chosen not to delve too deeply into the so-called “Gnostic Gospels.” While these texts are incredibly important in outlining the wide array of opinions among the early Christian community about who Jesus was and what his teachings meant, they do not shed much light on the historical Jesus himself.

Although it is almost unanimously agreed that, with the possible exception of Luke-Acts, the gospels were not written by the people for which they are named, for ease and the sake of clarity, I will continue to refer to the gospel writers by the names by which we now know and recognize them.

Finally, in keeping with scholarly designations, this text employs c.e., or Common Era, instead of a.d. in i ts dating, and b.c.e. instead of b.c. It also more properly refers to the Old Testament as the Hebrew Bible or the Hebrew Scriptures.



headline: Sending my soldier son off to Afghanistan
byline: By Jon Scott


Author's note: This account is not to suggest that my son is any more interesting or important than any of the other soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines who've answered the call to serve their country in the Afghan war. It is simply a father's first-person account, nothing more.

It's a beautiful blue-sky day in Eastern Kansas. Storms rolled through the previous night to wring the humidity out of the air. 

I'm sitting with my oldest son at his favorite breakfast place, just outside Ft. Riley, home of the Big Red One--the 1st Infantry Division. 

We're drinking coffee and idly perusing the menu while we wait for his buddies to join us. I'm not even aware of the Bob Marley song playing on the overhead speakers until he says matter-of-factly, "I love reggae! Makes me feel like I'm going to the beach today and not to war." 

 I ask point-blank how he's feeling.  "I'm excited," he answers.  "A little nervous, but mostly excited."   

I take a big swig of coffee. Maybe it'll wash down that lump I suddenly found in my throat. 

His two buddies arrive; there's laughter, joking. They've both seen this day before; both have deployed, either to Iraq or Afghanistan. One is going back on the same flight as my son. But for 1st Lt. Joshua Scott, and for me, this is all brand-new: his first combat deployment. 

I think about that time eight, maybe nine years ago when the memories of 9/11 still burned hot and the war in Iraq was young. 

Josh announced that the only school he wanted to attend was West Point. 

His mother wasn't keen on the idea of her son becoming a warrior. I remember telling her, "Don't worry. Iraq will be over by the time he graduates." 

I was right. But I never expected the war that began the month after 9/11 would still be roiling a dozen years later, that what seemed at first like the relatively low-intensity Afghan conflict would still pull U.S. forces into what has become America's longest war. Now my son, my soldier, is going over to help fight it.

We drive toward the baggage drop. Six years ago, it was a bright July day much like this one when we dropped him off at West Point to begin training to become an Army officer. 

Somehow that day was tougher for me; now I'm fishing around inside my head and my heart for the reason why. 

Back then we were only delivering an 18-year-old to begin basic training at the nation's oldest military academy; we knew we'd see him again in a matter of weeks. This deployment is scheduled to last nine months. Why was West Point's R-Day so much tougher for me to take?

Maybe it's because I've seen what a West Point education has done for him in those six years, what kind of man he's become. 

Back then, the father-son wrestling matches that occasionally broke out in our kitchen could usually end in a draw. 

These days, after his four years on the Army's Sprint Football team and participation in West Point's P-T (physical training) regimen, he could easily whip his old man in any contest.

It's more than his bulked-up physique, however. I see how he's matured, how he handles the myriad of responsibilities of an officer, how calm and unfazed he seems in stressful situations. The critical thinking and leadership skills developed at West Point are on daily display. This isn't the kid we dropped off six years ago. 

We arrive at a parking lot where some unseen giant has plopped four truck-sized steel boxes, shipping containers, one for each company deploying today. The clothing and personal gear that will sustain these soldiers for the next nine months, so laboriously packed into duffels, now gets stacked into these colossal steel caves. Soon the giant will return to stuff them into the belly of an Air Force cargo plane bound, like the soldiers, for Afghanistan. 

Now we're driving again, heading toward the site of the sendoff ceremony. I ask point-blank how he's feeling. "I'm excited," he answers."A little nervous, but mostly excited." 

We enter the cavernous helicopter hangar where the deployment ceremony will take place. Tables are piled high with food but nobody seems to be eating much.

My assessment is that two moods prevail here; the soldiers seem relaxed, maybe stoked--there are hearty hugs and high fives.

Nothing that I see among them resembles anything close to dread. But for the families, the mood seems somber, even sorrowful. I see a few tears, long lingering kisses and hugs that have no end.

The soldiers with families squeeze in their final few pre-deployment minutes with spouses and children. These are the scenes that truly make my heart ache. 

The kids, most of them too young to truly comprehend what's going on, spending precious seconds in the arms of Dad or Mom. It will be nine months, God willing, before they see each other again. For many of these kids that's a lifetime or more. 

The Army's myriad rules and regulations bring some unintended levity to the day. At one point Josh reaches in his pocket and realizes he's still carrying his multitool, complete with 3-inch blade.

He wonders whether he should take it on the plane. "I think we're not supposed to. Then again, we're going to be issued our weapons and we're bringing them onboard…so what difference does it make?" He grins.

Sure enough, we make our way to a back room of the hangar where dutiful soldiers with clipboards and checklists stand ready to dole out a soldier's most basic tool: his weapon.

My son's face lights up when he sees his name taped on an M-4 automatic; until this moment, he wasn't sure that's what he'd be getting. 

"They're so much lighter than the M-16," he says with relief. It's also far bigger and way more lethal than his multitool. I hope he never has to use it. If he has to use it, I hope it works.

Now we're back in the main hangar. Some soldier hooked up her laptop to provide the music, an eclectic mix of country, acid rock and pop.At the moment, Miley Cyrus is gleefully squealing:
"…So I put my hands up, they're playin' my song, the butterflies fly away…"

No, Miley, the butterflies in my stomach haven't gone anywhere. I think this entire cavernous hangar is filled with them.

A gentleman comes up, introduces himself, shakes my hand.His daughter is an Apache helicopter pilot who graduated West Point the year before my son. She's going over and yes, this is her first deployment too.

He thanks me for mentioning my son's story as I do from time to time on Fox News' "Happening Now." "People need to remember," he says, "we still have a war going on over there and this country's kids are fighting it!" 

Then the music breaks for an announcement: Ten minutes until the ceremony.Ten minutes to say your goodbyes.

I've anticipated this moment for days, weeks now. I've had all kinds of time to ponder the words I want to speak. I want it to be something brilliant, meaningful, inspirational--Neil Armstrong meets George Patton. But words fail me.

I tell him all the things he already knows, that I love him, I'm proud of him, we'll all be praying for him, stay safe. The last two seem so pointless.

He's going to a war zone. Do I honestly think he's not going to be doing everything he can every second of the day to do that? It's not like he'll hang one of those OSHA signs on the tent door, "Warning: Taliban outside! Remain alert!" I almost wish I hadn't been so trite.

The ceremony itself is mercifully brief. The soldiers gather in tight formation under a gigantic Stars and Stripes. The chaplain offers a prayer; a commander says a few more words. 

Then the order bellows throughout the hangar: "RIGHT FACE! FORWARD MARCH!" 

Four hundred men and women step smartly toward the aircraft doors and off to a war they tell us is ending. Dear God, bring each of them home! 

Applause erupts from those left behind as they step into the July day. The sun beams down on the soldiers while a father is beaming at his son. 



Jon Scottserves as co-anchor for Fox News Channel's "Happening Now." Scott joined FOX News Network in October of 1996, two months prior to its launch.



headline: Wake up, America, Detroit bankruptcy mess could happen in your city, too
byline: By Liz Peek


After seeing Detroit declare bankruptcy, people living in New York, Chicago and our other large cities should ask, could it happen here? The answer is yes, and it’s up to them to make sure it doesn’t. Are they up to the task? 

A recent poll showed that New Yorkers want their new mayor to have empathy.

Seriously: 61% of those asked said they want a mayor who “understands the needs and problems of people like you.”

Cities, like companies, have to deal with setbacks. Unhappily for Detroit, past mayors ignored warning signs.

Only 15% said they would pull the lever for someone who “knows how to attract and keep business” while a mere 11% thought they might vote for someone who has managed a large organization.

Are these people out of their minds? 

There is no mystery about why Detroit went belly-up. It’s not about a shrinking auto industry – it’s about management. Or, actually, mismanagement.

Detroit isn’t the only city that has suffered a population decline or lost an industry. Cleveland lost 17% of its inhabitants in the past decade; the 2010 population of 397,000 was the lowest since 1900 and less than half the 1950 total of 915,000. But – Cleveland isn’t bankrupt; it boasts a balanced budget.

Think about New York – once the garment center of the universe. See many button makers or zipper shops in New York recently? No – garment makers left for Asia decades ago. And yet, New York has prospered.

Cities, like companies, have to deal with setbacks. Unhappily for Detroit, past mayors ignored warning signs – of a shrinking population, declining tax base, ballooning pension and benefit obligations – and did nothing. They allowed whole neighborhoods to slide into decay and crime, further chasing off any prospect of renewal.

By contrast, when the worst financial crisis of modern times threatened New York’s future, Mayor Michael Bloomberg cut costs and also aggressively wooed job-creators. 

New York lost more than 20,000 financial jobs between 2007 and 2012. These are not ordinary jobs; with average salaries of $363,000 these pay more than 5 times the average private sector job. For New York, one quarter of all private sector wages related to the securities industry in 2007. Losing them was a huge hit to the tax base. 

Still, the city has prospered, recovering all the jobs lost in the recession by mid-2012 – way ahead of the rest of the country.

Why?

In part because City Hall pumped up efforts to recruit new industries like fashion, tourism and – perhaps most important – technology.

In 2012, a report published by the Center for an Urban Future declared that New York City had emerged as the country’s number two tech center, after not even being on the map five years earlier.

The authors note that New York had experienced “stunning growth” in the sector, welcoming an estimated 1,000 new tech start-ups since 2007 – a figure they describe as probably a “gross undercount.” New York region’s share of venture capital deals in the past decade has more than doubled from 5% to 11%.

The growth has provided tens of thousands of new jobs – when employment elsewhere was dropping. It isn’t all start-ups, either. Google, Facebook and Twitter and others have expanded their footprint in NY.

This is no accident. The city offered incubators, marketing help and other assists to tech outfits. In remarks announcing that a joint venture between Cornell University and Israel’s Technion had won the rights to build the city-sponsored new NYCTech Campus, Mayor Bloomberg estimated that the new high-powered complex could generate 600 spinoff companies and $23 billion in economic activity over the next thirty years.

Like Detroit, New York has had its ups and downs. As for the auto hub, New York’s “downs” were the result of catastrophically bad management at the hands of John Lindsay (known mainly for his “charisma”) and others while the “ups” were driven by tough coots like Ed Koch who took a transit strike early in his first term to rein in out-of-control municipal worker pay. That took guts, but that’s what a big city mayor needs.

Managing New York, or Detroit or Chicago isn’t easy. Michael Bloomberg, famously not burdened with empathy, brought to the task proven management skills, as well as the ability to attract and keep smart people.

City Hall bustles with brainiacs, not political hacks.

He’s also wealthy, and therefore not corrupt. That helps.

Detroit’s former mayor Kwame Kilpatrick is in jail, having recently been convicted of 24 felony counts related to corruption, racketeering and corruption. Twenty-four!

For years, Detroit’s mayors have used fiscal sleight-of hand to make the numbers work. Emergency Manager Kevyn Orr summarized in his first report on the state of the city, “Excluding proceeds from debt issuances, the city's expenditures have exceeded revenues from fiscal year 2008 to fiscal year 2012 by an average of $100 million annually. These financial shortfalls have been addressed with long term debt issuances…and by deferring payments of certain city obligations, such as contributions to the city’s two pension funds.” In other words, previous administrations simply failed to address the city’s financial problems, and hoped no one – and especially not voters—would notice.

At a news conference after filing for bankruptcy, Orr said about Detroit’s financial mismanagement, “What shocked me was the tolerance for this behavior for decades.” He added, “Frankly, I’m surprised … I know a lot of people were outraged by my appointment … I wish there had been a lot more outrage over the past 10, 20 years.” 

There wasn’t much outrage, but then maybe voters were looking for empathy in Detroit, too.



Liz Peek is a writer who contributes frequently to FoxNews.com. She is a financial columnist who also writes for The Fiscal Times. For more visit LizPeek.com. Follow her on Twitter@LizPeek.



headline: What small business owners want you to know
byline: By Dan Danner


During National Small Business Week, politicians and bureaucrats give a lot of lip service to small business. But you might wonder what the small-business community itself might say if they themselves had the podium this week.

Here’s what I think they would say:

I’m different from a lot of folks, because I take the risks and I accept the consequences. Scientists who study risk-takers include “people who start a business” in a category that includes mountain climbers, Navy SEALs and explorers. We aren’t adrenaline junkies, but we’re brave enough to risk everything we own to start a business that we think will serve our community and allow us to be our own boss.

There is no such thing as a day off for a small-business owner. Especially when the business is really small – i.e. just a few or no employees. If we want to take a day off or go on vacation, the business itself must temporarily close, and that can be more costly than we can afford.

There are an estimated 2.5 million true “family businesses” in the United States. That estimate includes all employing businesses that have two or more family members as owners, and two or more adult family members who actively participate as manager, employee, or as-needed volunteer.

As for the non-blood relatives who work for me? I’ll put it this way: I know the names of my employees’ spouses and kids. I care about their lives. It’s personal.

Don’t ever assume that a business owner is “rich.” You may be talking to someone who hasn’t cut herself a paycheck in months because that’s what has to be done to make sure employees get paid.

Yes, small-business owners pay their taxes like individuals (versus like big corporations who get a lot of tax breaks), but there is a big difference between our business income and your paycheck. Our income feeds our families, yes, but it also needs to be managed carefully for those times when sales are slow, the economy is dragging, or to re-invest in the business and create new jobs.

My business is my retirement and it is my legacy to my kids; I hope to pass it on to them.

Historically, small firms create the lion’s share of net new jobs in the U.S. Collectively, they are responsible for almost half of the non-farm GDP and employ nearly half of the private-sector workforce. All of this means I should be more than just a talking point, but politicians can make me sound more like a message and less like the economic powerhouse that I am.

According to the Small Business Administration’s Office of Advocacy, of high patenting firms (15 or more in a four-year period), small businesses produce 16 times more patents per employee than large patenting firms.

In any given year, over ninety percent of small employers contribute to their community through volunteering, in-kind contributions, and/or direct cash donations. I give to the Little League, buy uniforms for the high school band and advertise in the yearbook every year.

According to Gallup, only the U.S. military outranks small business when it comes to groups of people they trust (Congress, for example, is in last place on that list).

Buying health insurance for myself and my employees has been difficult, literally, for decades. Obamacare promises to make the cost much, much higher. When I see premium quotes these days, I’m beyond saying “uncle!” and feeling more like saying “I quit!” Fortunately, it’s not in my nature to quit.

Being my own boss, doing it the way I want to, providing jobs and contributing to my community…this the very definition of freedom, and it is the American dream.

Is it hard work? You bet it is. But I love it.

Once you get to know the people behind the small businesses in your community, you’ve taken the first step toward supporting these brave men and women.





headline: My fellow Republicans, wake up -- Latinos are today's Reagan Democrats
byline: By Alfonso Aguilar


It’s time for the GOP to disregard the advice of establishment strategists who say that the party has to give up its defense of the right to life and the sanctity of marriage to win elections.

According to them, Republican candidates are losing the support of independents, women and young people because of their conservative views on these issues.

They point to recent polling that shows that the majority of these constituencies today favor abortion remaining legal and same-sex marriage.

The fallacy of this argument lies in the fact that, while voters today may indeed hold positions that are socially liberal with regards to those specific issues, the majority of them do not vote based on these issues. The majority of Americans vote based on pocket issues like the economy, taxes and jobs.

Opposing immigration reform has never been a benchmark conservative posture.

Contrary to conventional wisdom, the majority of voters who vote exclusively based on social issues, vote for candidates who are conservative; who are pro-life and support traditional marriage.

Moreover, the small minority of voters who are primarily focused on the legalization of same-sex marriage and on keeping abortion legal will always vote overwhelmingly for Democratic candidates.

In other words, if the GOP were to gut its social agenda, rather than try to win over new voters, it would only alienate the faith-based constituency it desperately needs to mobilize and win elections. It may well end up with a "big tent" as the establishment desires, but one that's pretty empty.

Republicans, however, also need to overcome the obstacles posed by what could be called "self-referential" conservatives; those within the party who have a hard time engaging constituencies that seem different -- for the most part, superficially -- to their base.

They seem intent in not wanting to find out if these groups may share their same values or they may have convinced themselves already that they don't. Leaving the comfort zone of their shrinking base to go out to the periphery of our society to win new supporters, not by giving up principles, but by winning people over with the power of their ideas, is simply something they're not willing to do.

The fear of the different paralyzes them and leads them to give up their efforts to find converts and grow the party and movement.

The debate over immigration is the perfect example of this phenomenon. The GOP, until a mere seven years ago, was decisively supportive of immigration.

All the Republican presidents as well as presidential candidates of the modern era were supportive of immigration. And they held these view not because they were liberal, but because as good conservatives they understood that, historically, immigration has been essential to the economic growth of the nation, including for the creation of good jobs for American workers.

They also understood that immigrants help rekindle and strengthen the values and principles of our founding that sadly so many Americans today take for granted.

They understood that immigrants make America more, not less, American.

Yet, faced with a new large wage of immigrants, reminiscent of that of the turn of the last century, many Republicans, instead of remaining firm to their pro-immigration values, opted to shift their views to a restrictionist and nationalistic stance which demonizes all undocumented immigrants as serious criminals who should not be given a path to legal status even if required to pay a penalty and back taxes.

This is, thus, a relatively new point of view within the GOP and no one should try to argue, as incredibly some restrictionists are doing now, that opposing a path to legal status for undocumented immigrants is as defining for conservatives as defending small government and lower taxes and the right to life and the sanctity of marriage. Opposing immigration reform has never been a benchmark conservative posture.

One of the main reasons continuously articulated by GOP restrictionist leaders for opposing immigration reform is that supposedly Hispanics will never vote in large enough numbers for Republicans. They choose to ignore President Reagan's famous quip: "Hispanics are conservative, they just don't know it."

They don't care to hear that most Hispanics believe that abortion should be illegal, are opening businesses three times as fast as the national average and are supportive of school choice.

They also refuse to consider than just 8 years ago President Bush got as much as 44 percent of the Latino vote, and that the only reason that it went down to 27 percent in the last election is because of their ugly rhetoric on the issue of immigration.

They have made up their minds, regardless if it's actually true, that for the most part, Hispanics are different from their base and that it's waste of time to try to win them over.

This obtuse frame of mind threatens not only the viability of Republicans nationally, but most importantly, the growth of the conservative movement, and with it, the advancement of fundamental conservative principles like fiscal responsibility, limited government, family and faith.

Fifty-one percent of Latinos identify today as independent.

The Democratic Party is bleeding Hispanic voters because of its radical policies, but often they still end up voting for Democratic candidates because they believe that the GOP doesn't care about them.

Republicans should wake up and realize that Latinos are today's Reagan Democrats. They should pro-actively embrace them based on shared conservative values to form a winning conservative coalition in America.

In this sense, House Republicans have now a historic opportunity to begin building this coalition. If they choose to ignore the restrictionists within their ranks and decide to pass an immigration reform bill that is consistent with conservative principles, they will go a long way in making inroads with Latino voters and becoming once again a viable political force in national elections.

The road to victory for the GOP does not lie in giving up the conservative principles that it has historically stood for, but by opening itself -- firmly grounded on those values -- to new constituencies that they have ignored in the past.





headline: Hillary Clinton -- supporting  early childhood education through public-private partnerships
byline: By Lanny Davis


Last week I wrote about Hillary Clinton’s June 13 speech at the Clinton Global Initiative (CGI) meeting in Chicago, describing her ability to place the issue of opportunities for women and girls in a broader context than women’s rights — showing its relevance to prosperity for all, men included.

She did the same with respect to the other two issues she spoke to in her speech — early childhood education development and job-creating economic development — indeed, treating them as virtually one and the same. Once again, she relied on compelling facts:

- In the U.S. only 50 percent of our children receive any early childhood education, much of it the wealthier half, compared to China’s goal of providing three years of early learning for 70 percent by 2020.

Ideas, innovations, partnerships and public service are all part of the ethics and values that have become a way of life for Hillary Clinton.

- The first five years of life have a dramatic effect on later adult development. Seven hundred new neural connections are formed every second, laying the foundation for the learning, behavior and health we need to grow up as productive adults.

- According to pioneering research by Nobel-prize winning economist James Heckman of the University of Chicago, our nation saves seven dollars during a child’s lifetime for every dollar we invest now in early childhood education. Those savings are measured by higher high school graduation rates, greater likelihood of future employment, lower expenditures for special education, lower incarceration rates and a reduction of other social ills.

At the CGI meeting, Clinton launched a new partnership called “Too Small to Fail” to promote the latest brain development research and help parents to take steps to improve the health and well-being of children in their first five years. It will also work with businesses on expanding flexibility and support of young children.

Clinton clearly articulated her belief in the importance of public-private partnerships as “one of the most important problem-solving tools.” And during her speech, she offered a prime and very specific example: Mr. J. B. Pritzker, a leading member of the world-famous business and philanthropic Pritzker family of Chicago, who had announced at the CGI conference the issuance of “Social Impact Bonds” to finance pre-school education programs for at-risk children.

Such bonds are a new tool, sometimes called "results-based financing," that use private capital to achieve positive social outcomes, generating modest financial returns for private investors while simultaneously generating much greater returns in the form of cost savings for cash-strapped state and local governments.

Pritzker announced at the conference a partnership with the investment bank Goldman Sachs to invest $7 million to fund the expansion of a successful pre-school program that reduces the need for special education at Granite District in Salt Lake City, Utah. Over several years, the new financing will benefit more than 3,500 children and save taxpayers millions of dollars.

The bonds in which Pritzker and Goldman Sachs are investing will be repaid by the school districts only out of actual cost savings in special education, which are significant.

Data from a study conducted in 2006-09 demonstrated that 33 percent of low-income kindergarten students would have needed costly special education services paid for by taxpayers. But after participating in the District’s pre-school program, 95 percent of these children no longer needed special education, saving taxpayers more than $2,600 per child each year for 12 years. Heckman, the award-winning economist, would say there are even bigger savings to taxpayers, which aren’t even calculated in these numbers.

Pritzker and Goldman Sachs will see a return on their bonds only to the extent that the projected cost savings in special education actually occur. In other words, all the risk is theirs, not the taxpayers’ or the school district’s.

This is why Clinton took such pains to thank Pritzker during her CGI America speech and to praise his innovative investment in the Social Impact Bonds for early childhood education. She sees this as an important paradigm for “doing good while doing well,” using the public-private partnership mechanism.

If it can work in Salt Lake, she and Pritzker reason, it can work elsewhere — not only for early childhood education but in other areas of great social needs facing America.

Ideas, innovations, partnerships and public service are all part of the ethics and values that have become a way of life for Hillary Clinton since I first met her in law school more than 42 years ago. And this is why, regardless of whether she seeks higher office in the future, she will certainly make an important contribution to the public good in the months and years ahead.





headline: Obama's disastrous second term
byline: By Michael Goodwin


If you want to start a fight with a room full of liberals, insist that Barack Obama is the worst president in recent history. The blowback about George W. Bush and Iraq will drown you out, but here’s a way to quiet the crowd: Insist that Obama’s second term is the worst term in recent presidential history.

There can be no argument there.

Each week hits a new low point, and the only debate is about which moment was the worst. Last week featured the massive security breach by Edward Snowden and Obama’s pathetic Hamlet act over Syria.

We don’t yet know which caused more harm to American interests and eroded more trust in government. Either way, the president is lost in a fog of his own making.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Same-sex marriage decisions beg question, should America's new motto be 'in polls we trust'?
byline: By Cal Thomas


"For this reason a man shall leave his father and his mother, and be joined to his wife; and they shall become one flesh." -- Genesis 2:24, NIV

The problem for people who believe in an Authority higher even than the Constitution is that in our increasingly secular and indifferent society it has become more difficult to persuade those who do not subscribe to an immutable standard to accept that view.

It is nearly impossible to restrain a people intent on throwing off any and all restraints.

History is full of examples of empires that collapsed from within before they were conquered from without.

The Supreme Court has narrowly, but effectively, removed another standard on the way to full acceptance of its right to redefine marriage and raise itself to a level higher than the Creator.

While the Supreme Court's 5-4 decision overturning the Defense of Marriage Act does not establish a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, that's where it seems headed.

What or who is to stop them? Various religious-political groups formed over many years to confront cultural erosion are in retreat and increasingly ineffective.

Modern courts might have trouble with Thomas Jefferson's declaration, "We hold these truths to be self-evident." Is there anything that is self-evident today and not subject to challenge given the right circumstances?

Even a secular person should be required to answer a question before removing such an important cultural underpinning as traditional marriage: If marriage is no longer to be reserved for one man and one woman, as it has for millennia in many different cultures and religions, what is the new standard and on what is it based? Should we change America's motto to "in polls we trust"?

The New York Times recently editorialized in favor of transgender rights.

Polygamist groups have made it known they wish to be next in line to enjoy full constitutional protection for their lifestyle. Utah was forced to outlaw polygamy before admission to the Union. Can it, should it, revert to its previous practice and who has the authority to say "no"?

There are people who favor sex and marriage between adults and children. On what basis should they be denied their "right to happiness"?

Today's "that goes too far" easily becomes tomorrow's "right" with a morally vacuous media leading the charge and a morally exhausted people who are afraid to say "stop," for fear they'll be labeled "bigots."

Boundaries serve a purpose, in sport and in life. Fences keep out trespassers and protect children on playgrounds. Governments impose speed limits. Lines define a football field.

The problem faced by moral-political forces -- from Prohibition, to abortion and now same-sex marriage -- is that they are confronted by growing numbers of people who do not believe in, or can be persuaded by, ancient, even biblical, instruction constraining human behavior.

Many young people whose parents are divorced, or who are cohabiting without marriage, are not influenced by such commands or "preaching."

While the Supreme Court's 5-4 decision overturning the Defense of Marriage Act does not establish a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, that's where it seems headed. Justice Antonin Scalia predicted it would a decade ago when the Supreme Court invalidated laws prohibiting homosexual conduct in Lawrence v. Texas.

One doesn't have to approve of the Court's "reasoning" in order to hand it to the gay rights campaigners. They have done a magnificent job advancing their objectives, but they couldn't have done it alone.

A verse from the Old Testament warns about the detrimental effects such "advances" can have on individuals and nations that abandon moral boundaries: "In those days Israel had no king; everyone did what was right in his own eyes." -- Judges 17:6, NIV



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: ObamaCare turns one -- here's what America still needs to know
byline: By Toby Cosgrove, M.D.


When the Supreme Court deemed the Affordable Care Act constitutional one year ago, it was a monumental moment in our nation’s history.

It meant that essential, historic reform of the American health care system would move forward. It meant guaranteed health care access for millions of Americans who hadn’t had access before.

It meant a re-energized focus on medical quality and the development of a more efficient health care delivery system.

Collectively, we must all take responsibility for the cost of health care by losing weight, eating healthier and quitting smoking.

Twelve months after the court’s decision, though, there are still more questions than answers.

Will insurance exchange programs be up and running by the due date? Will Americans understand these exchanges, what they will cover, and how to enroll? Will states expand Medicaid, as encouraged by the ACA? And what impact will the ACA have on hospitals, the economy and jobs?

One of the few certainties at this point is that reimbursement for medical services will decrease. health care providers will be paid less to deliver more care.

Our challenge is to find ways to work more efficiently and decrease costs, while continuing to deliver high quality care.

With implementation of the ACA, hospitals face some relief but also new pressures. Expanding health insurance to about 30 million more Americans will mean hospitals won’t have to shoulder as much of the cost of caring for the uninsured. However, all of those additional patients will need thousands more physicians than are working now.

The ACA does take some steps toward driving down health spending; for example, it will stop reimbursing hospitals for preventable re-admissions, creating a financial incentive for doctors to get treatment right the first time.

That’s certainly a start, but with a growing elderly population and a still-recovering economy, more needs to be done.

Specifically, four items should be at the top of the list – Medicaid expansion, hospital consolidation, salaried physicians and obesity. Here's more:

- Medicaid expansion was expected to cover 17 million uninsured Americans, but states can opt out.

In Ohio, the coverage of 275,000 low-income, uninsured Ohioans is at risk as politicians argue that Medicaid expansion would strain the state budget or expand the government’s role in health care.

That is simply wrong -- medically, economically and morally -- if we as a country believe that all Americans should have access to health insurance.

- Consolidation will be a growing trend in health care as providers look for ways to draw on each other’s resources and expertise.

Technological advances have become too expensive for all hospitals to be all things to all people. Instead, hospitals will come together to form networks of care, with certain hospitals acting as centers of excellence.

- Physicians should be salaried, not paid on a per-procedure or per-patient basis.

At Cleveland Clinic, all doctors are salaried employees of the hospital. They are paid the same, regardless of how many tests they order or how many surgeries they perform. The intent is not to get a bigger paycheck but to do what’s best for the patient.

- By 2020, half of all Americans are likely to suffer from one or more chronic diseases, a majority of them weight-related.

The ACA does not address this issue, but we simply cannot control health care spending without addressing Americans' weight.

We have to create incentives to keep people healthy, through programs that encourage wellness and prevention. When people are healthy, health care costs go down.

This is a time of unprecedented transformation in health care. We’ve truly entered a “new normal” in health care, and everyone is working quickly to adapt.

However, this isn’t a topic to be dealt with by health care providers alone. Collectively, we must all take responsibility for the cost of health care in this country by losing weight, eating healthier and quitting smoking. After all, the state of our nation is only as good as the state of our health.





headline: Actual Schindler's list offered on eBay -- what price should we put on memory?
byline: By Rabbi Abraham Cooper


How much will the eBay auction of an historical, original Schindler’s list go for? What is it really worth? And where does that document belong?

There is no word in Hebrew for history. For us Jews it has never been about documents or statistics, rather the commandment -- Zachor -- Remember!

‘Remember the Sabbath,’ 'remember you were once slaves in Egypt,' ‘remember Amalek’, whose murderous attacks on the Israelites in the desert would inspire anti-Semitic genociders from Persia’s Haman to Germany’s Hitler.

But remembering the Holocaust is a daunting challenge. The numbers are mind numbing -- 6 million Jews killed, among them 1.5 million children. Entire communities annihilated -- entire extended families wiped out, virtually without a trace.

Whether an original copy of Oskar Schindler's list goes for $1 or $3 million, I beseech the new owner, not to lock it up in a vault.

Stalin, one of history’s most vicious mass murderers was right when he said: One death is a tragedy, a million deaths -- a statistic.

But for Holocaust survivors, for us and for generations yet to be born, the challenge is how to keep alive the flickering embers of memory of the Nazis’ victims that erode with the passage of time.

I recall the tears of joy of a child of a Holocaust survivor, after I handed him a copy of his father’s 1938 Nazi "Fragebogen," a questionnaire that every Austrian Jew was forced to accurately complete -- under penalty of being sent to a concentration camp -- and list their every belonging, down to their Sabbath candlesticks.

Soon after everything would be confiscated. His father would be counted among the 6 million.

“So why the tears of joy,” I asked.

“Because, at least now, I now have one thing of my father’s that was uniquely his—his signature”…

I learned that day that even a yellowing document, even a fading word hurriedly penned by a Jew under gunpoint of the Devil himself, can help us connect to the image of a real person.

The Simon Wiesenthal Center’s Museum of Tolerance has hosted over 5 million visitors. We rely heavily on high-tech exhibitory and historical timelines to guide our visitors. But it is still real documents from the past that instill the resolve to remember:

- The 1940 pen pal letters between Anne and Margo Frank that draw tears from people of all ages who read Anne’s diary.

- The 1932 handwritten note by Albert Einstein who reflected on the importance of tolerance in a world increasingly bereft of it.

- The 1919 letter typed and personally signed by Adolph Hitler confirming his desire to do away with the Jews -- 20 years before he unleashed history’s most devastating war and genocide.

- The first memo from a skeletal Holocaust survivor, who though still too weak to walk, refused to forget, and dictated the names of Nazi war criminals just days after Simon Wiesenthal was liberated by American soldiers in May 1945.

So how much is an original Schindler’s list worth?

I don’t know. You can’t put a price tag on memory. But whether it goes for $1 or $3 million, I beseech the new owner, not to lock it up in a vault. Its pedagogical value is beyond priceless.

Everyone who learns the lessons from that document, whether at the Museum of Tolerance, University, or in a public library, will become a bridge to the past and a guardian for the memory of 6 million innocent people who were abandoned by an uncaring world. And they will be inspired by those few heroes like Oskar Schindler, who kept hope alive -- then, now and for generations to come.





headline: President Obama's take on race after Zimmerman case
byline: By Cal Thomas


President Obama rarely misses an opportunity to insert himself into an issue. Last Friday, he appeared in the White House pressroom to comment on the George Zimmerman verdict. The president said he could have been Trayvon Martin. Not likely, given his private schooling and the way he was fast-tracked to success.

The president said the history of African-Americans partially explains the way many black people view the case. He spoke of blacks hearing car doors lock as they cross the street and of white women who clutch their purses tightly when a black person enters an elevator.

Then he touched on the real problem: "Now, this isn't to say that the African-American community is naive about the fact that African-American young men are disproportionately involved in the criminal justice system, that they are disproportionately both victims and perpetrators of violence. It's not to make excuses for that fact, although black folks do interpret the reasons for that in a historical context. We understand that some of the violence that takes place in poor black neighborhoods around the country is born out of a very violent past in this country, and that the poverty and dysfunction that we see in those communities can be traced to a very difficult history."

When black people kill each other, or murder a white person, the president usually feels no need to comment

OK, but what about poor people in the same neighborhoods who don't engage in violent behavior?

What values are they being taught?

Don't they have the same history, but make different choices?

It is not news that much poverty in the African-American community stems from broken or never-started families; or that too many black men leave black women to raise children on their own; or that the way "gangsta culture" is portrayed in the media does not produce an image that is endearing to white employers; or that public schools in minority neighborhoods are failing to build the foundations necessary for a successful life; or that the abortion rate among black women is four times higher than non-Hispanic whites among 15-19 year-olds, according to the Guttmacher Institute. Abortion, which the president has done nothing to curtail, also devalues African-American lives.

The politics of race plays a role. When black people kill each other, or murder a white person, the president usually feels no need to comment (the recent murder of 15-year-old Hadiya Pendleton being a rare exception); Al Sharpton doesn't march, Jesse Jackson doesn't call for boycotts, or label Florida an "apartheid state," as he did following the Zimmerman verdict. Are black lives only worth mentioning when they are extinguished by non-blacks?

There are black people who are disgusted by the behavior, clothing, attitude and language of some young black men. On the Washington Post's website last week, beneath a transcript of the president's remarks last Friday, a reader posting under the name "Chaquita1" offered a personal story about recently being on a train and watching an African-American woman give the evil eye to a pair of young African-American males in "gangsta wear" making a commotion. They became belligerent, talking about "the fat lady glaring at them."

The woman arose, Chaquita1 wrote, "and said 'Trayvon Martin died for nothing. His death did not empower you, it should have been a wake-up call.' She then returned to her seat, looked straight at me and said, 'You have white trash. We have black trash.'"

Discussions like this should be included in any "conversation about race" the president says he wants, along with how such attitudes and behavior contribute to racial conflict.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Arming Syria's rebels not the answer, here's what US must do
byline: By K.T. McFarland


A cardinal rule in foreign policy is this: if your enemies are busy killing each other, don’t step in and try to stop them. Yet, that’s exactly what we would be doing if we train, arm or provide military assistance to the Syrian rebels.

I’ve just returned from a week in Israel. While I was there I travelled to the Syrian, Lebanese, Palestinian West Bank and Jordanian borders.

I met with Israeli officials, journalists and military officers. Although they are reluctant to say so publicly, there seems little doubt in their minds that the strongest rebel groups in Syria are radical Sunni Islamists. There may be other rebel groups that are secular and pro-Western, but they are weak, unorganized and unlikely to prevail without massive outside military assistance. Those rebels might have been stronger today if we had helped them two years ago, but at this point they stand little chance of defeating either Assad or the other rebel militias. 

Arming the pro-Western rebels in Syria would give them a major assist, but it is unlikely to change the final outcome.

In other words, the Syrian civil war is now down to a fight between the mass murdering, chemical-weapons-using Assad government, and the Al Qaeda-affiliated, radical extremists. 

We don’t want either of them to win. But Iran, Russia, Lebanon, Al Qaeda, and some Gulf states all do. And they’ve lined up on both sides of the battlefield providing fighters, arms and aid. 

The Syrian civil war has become a proxy battle between Sunnis and Shiites, and serves as a giant sponge soaking up militants from as far away as Europe and South Asia. 

It is a tragedy of epic proportions.

But Americans don’t like to stand by while innocent people are killed and watch a human disaster unfold. It goes against our very fiber. We feel compelled to DO something. 

Arming the pro-Western rebels in Syria would give them a major assist, but it is unlikely to change the final outcome.

It also carries the risk that whatever arms we give them now could be seized by Al Qaeda rebel forces and used against us or our allies down the road. And, while establishing a no-fly zone might be a setback for Assad’s forces, the major beneficiaries will be the Al Qaeda-affiliated rebels.

Clearly, establishing a pro-Western, anti-Iranian, anti-Russian, secular post-Assad Syrian government would be a major gain for us and that of our allies. But that is an option we no longer have.

The cold harsh reality is that Syria is already lost.

So, is there anything we can do that advances our interests and has a reasonable chance of success? Yes. 

- We can provide humanitarian assistance to refugees who are living in refugee camps throughout the region.

- We can allow some Syrian refugees to emigrate to the US, provided they are fully vetted. 

- And we can shore up our allies in the region, especially Jordan, which is most at risk.

There are officially half a million Syrian refugees in Jordan, some think there could be a million refugees before long. Jordan is a poor country that is running out of water, natural gas, and food. A million refugees flooding into Jordan is like some 50 million refugees showing up on America’s shores.

If Jordan is to remain stable and independent it needs assistance now. If Jordan descends into economic and political chaos, it risks igniting the Palestinians and drawing the entire region into a widening conflict.

- Finally, we can make sure we know where Assad’s chemical weapons are stashed and work with our allies in the region to seize or destroy them before they fall into the hands of forces that would use them against us. -- We failed to secure Qaddafi’s weapons caches during the Libyan war. Today they are being used in conflicts from North Africa to the Gaza strip. We cannot make that same mistake with Syria’s chemical weapons.

President Obama laid down a red line stating what he would do were Assad to use chemical weapons. We now know he has.

Some argue that is reason enough for the U.S. to intervene in Syria; that our credibility is on the line. But President Obama is fond of red lines and making threats – to Iran, to North Korea, to Syria. His credibility is already damaged. It will be much more so if we aid and arm Syria’s rebels and our efforts fail.

In fairness to them, Obama nor the Republican interventionists suggest that we should put U.S. boots on the ground in Syria. But in fairness to the American people, enforcing a no-fly zone or training rebel forces are military operations, despite what we call them.-- It’s like calling taxes “revenue enhancements.” 

One of the lessons of Vietnam, which we failed to heed in the Iraq war and the Afghanistan surge, is that before you commit U.S. military forces to aid or assist, it is essential to know what you want them to achieve. 

Without a clearly defined mission, it is impossible to know what kind and how much assistance to give, or predict how long the commitment will be. 

Once we send military aid, or American troops to train and fight or set up a no-fly zone, it is crucial that we match resources to mission and means to ends.

We must also be prepared to adjust both as necessary, since the enemy will inevitably adapt and the situation will evolve.

We should have a sense of what constitutes victory, and what is the likely outcome once the shooting stops. 

Finally, we should be upfront with the American people about the costs of our involvement, both human and material. 

If all those sound like limiting factors, they are. It is all too easy for our political leaders to intervene in conflicts. That is why we should only commit American forces to fight if it is in America’s vital and essential national self-interest, and if we are prepared to do whatever necessary to prevail.In that case, losing is not an option.

On the other hand, the only thing worse than not getting involved in a fight we feel is just, but not vital, is getting involved and then losing, or despite our best intentions, making things worse. 





headline: Obama's misguided magical thinking about nuclear weapons
byline: By Michaela Dodge


When Hollywood celebrities “Demand Zero,” President Obama applauds. Thursday in Berlin, he announced his intent to march further along “The Road to Zero”—toward a world without nuclear weapons.

Movie stars aren’t expected to understand the intricacies of nuclear weapons policy, but the commander-in-chief should know better than to follow this path.

For decades, nuclear weapons have played a critical role in U.S. security, deterring potential aggressors from attacking our homeland and troops deployed abroad. Our allies have relied on has U.S. nuclear umbrella, as well. It’s been so effective—and so reliable—most of our allies have foregone developing nuclear weapons of their own.

Many argue that, if the U.S. reduces its stockpile of nuclear weapons, other nations will follow its lead. That is magical thinking. 

While “Demand Zero” may sound great on red carpets in Hollywood and Manhattan, it sure doesn’t ring true in Tokyo and Seoul. People living there know they face a real threat: nuclear-armed North Korea.

Pyongyang has repeatedly threatened to turn South Korea – and the United States – to “a sea of fire.” Kim Jong Eun already has ballistic missiles that can reach Japan and U.S. troops deployed throughout the region. The need for deterrence remains.

But President Obama has been hitting the Road to Zero for years.

In February 2011, his negotiating team signed off on the New START—a treaty with Russia that limits each nation to no more than 1,550 strategic nuclear warheads.

For the U.S., that means reducing our nuclear arsenal by 250 warheads over a seven-year period.

For Russia, it means zero reductions; they don’t have that many strategic warheads… yet. (The treaty did, however, allow them to keep their 10-1 advantage over the U.S. in tactical nukes.)

Now, the president wants to cut deeper. In Germany, he proposed slashing the number of American strategic nuclear weapons by up to a third—to as low as 1,000.

Many argue that, if the U.S. reduces its stockpile of nuclear weapons, other nations will follow its lead. That is magical thinking. There is absolutely no historical evidence to support the Field of Dreams-like notion that “If we scrap ‘em, they will too.”

Since the end of the Cold War, the U.S. has eliminated around 80 percent of its nuclear arsenal. No other nation has followed suit.

Yes, South Africa gave up its nukes, but that happened while the U.S. was still testing its weapons and expanding its arsenal. But since we began drawing down our stocks, North Korea and Pakistan have emerged as new nuclear powers—and Iran is nipping at their heels.

The world may take its cues from Hollywood on matters of fashion and style, but world leaders don’t follow their advice—or the president’s example—when it comes to geopolitics.

Other nations will not follow the U.S. lead in anything—unless they think it’s in their interest. To assume that they will “do as the U.S. does” is both arrogant and contrary to the historical evidence.

Heck, we don’t know how those New START reductions will impact other states yet. While the treaty codified unilateral U.S. reductions, it left Russia room to build up. And since signing the treaty, Russia has launched the most extensive nuclear weapons modernization program since the end of the Cold War.

This puts the U.S. in dramatically weaker position for the new round of negotiations the President now is seeking.

Meanwhile, the U.S. remains the only nuclear power without a substantive nuclear weapons modernization program. This alone should make Washington think twice before ridding ourselves of weapons that have prevented mass slaughters for more than six decades.

As for our allies, no one can blame them if they start feeling a little antsy about the future of the protective “nuclear umbrella.” When seeking Senate ratification of New START, President Obama certified he would follow through with all phases of the Phased Adaptive Approach—his missile defense plan to protect the U.S. and Europe. But this March, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel announced that won’t happen. He gutted the last Phase.

What if the Russians, who objected strenuously to the president’s Phased Adaptive Approach, balk at going along with a proposal that would actually cut their nuclear arsenal as well as ours?

Would the president be willing to jettison U.S. nukes unilaterally?

Or might he will offer concessions not even the Russians can refuse. After all, he did promise former Russian President Dmitry Medvedev some second-term “flexibility.”





headline: How liberals have it wrong about Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity
byline: By Alan Colmes


Headlines have been blaring all over the digital universe about Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity being tossed off the radio airwaves by Cumulus and losing 40 stations in key markets.

For example, Politico's Dylan Byers reported:

"In a major shakeup for the radio industry, Cumulus Media, the second-biggest broadcaster in the country, is planning to drop both Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity from its stations at the end of the year, an industry source told POLITICO on Sunday.

Cumulus has decided that it will not renew its contracts with either host, the source said, a move that would remove the two most highly rated conservative talk personalities from more than 40 Cumulus channels in major markets."

However, in the words of the legendary radio broadcaster Paul Harvey, readers are not being told the rest of the story.

Cumulus and Clear Channel have been buying up stations in major markets. Limbaugh and Hannity are syndicated by Premiere, which is owned by Clear Channel.

RUSH LIMBAUGH GOES "ON THE RECORD" WITH GRETA VAN SUSTEREN TONIGHT AT 10 ON FOX NEWS CHANNEL

Rather than pay fees to Cumulus to carry these shows it makes more sense to put them on their own properties, reduce local talent costs, and save those fees.

The two top-rated talkers aren't going anywhere. They're just changing dial positions and, in many cases, to better signals.

Seeing liberal bloggers declare victory about how a boycott of these shows' sponsors led to this makes my hair stand on end for four reasons.  

Seeing liberal bloggers declare victory about how a boycott of these shows' sponsors led to this makes my hair stand on end for four reasons.

First, that's not at all what happened, as these shows will land elsewhere.

Second, and even more importantly, these two broadcasters, with whom I vehemently, vocally, and publicly disagree politically, have done more to keep the talk radio industry alive than anyone else.

It's because of the success of these two shows that many stations have stayed in the talk format in the first place, allowing other shows to be heard. Much as liberals don't have nearly as many outlets as conservatives (According to Talkers Magazine, conservatives own the lion's share of the news/talk market), it would be even worse for the left if these shows weren't making it, because the industry would be closer to collapse at a time when terrestrial radio is struggling.

Third, a boycott hurts the entire business. Advertisers run scared and are encouraged to avoid controversy, and that affects all programming, including progressive hosts.

Fourth, what kind of liberal wants to clamp down on free speech and celebrate shutting someone up?

The best antidote to free speech is -- free speech. As the German theologian Martin Niemoller famously said, "First they came for the Socialists, and I did not speak out because I was not a Socialist..."

If I, as a liberal, didn't speak out against those who would squelch the free speech of conservatives, I wouldn't deserve to call myself a liberal.

I will continue to speak out against the views of both Limbaugh and Hannity when I feel it's warranted, meeting their free speech with my own. But I will never forget that, without them, I'd have a much smaller platform on which to do it.





headline: As Federal Reserve meets, Americans should consider cutting spending
byline: By Peter Morici


Wednesday, the Federal Reserve is expected to indicate how quickly it will push up interest rates.

Ordinary Americans can expect monthly payments on home purchases to rise, selling houses they already own to get tougher, and interest rates to jump on credit cards and other consumer loans.

Recent retail sales reports indicate the average family is spending freely and not saving very much.This may be a good time to trim back—families may need to borrow in an emergency and higher interest rates will take a bite out of the family budget.

This is a good time to rethink the family budget. If you have credit card debt, pay it down as quickly as you can.

The Fed has been purchasing $85 billion in mortgage-backed securities and longer term Treasury Bonds—economists call this "Quantitative Easing."

These purchases have fueled, until recently, rock bottom mortgage rates and a much heralded surge in housing prices. The latter could well prove unsustainable, because Wall Street speculators have been doing a lot of the home buying, even as the demand for home ownership is the United States is actually waning.

More Americans are choosing to rent that's because many young families, saddled with huge student debt and earning less than their parents, can’t consider purchasing a piece of suburb heaven.

The Zillow Survey of 105 economic forecasters, in which I participate, has the surge in housing prices slowing significantly in 2014 and 2015. This deceleration could turn into a housing market collapse if the Fed pulls back on easy money too quickly, and many more homeowners could owe more than their homes are worth.

Car sales and prices have been booming, as Ford, GM and others have offered customers with good credit scores quite reasonable rates on new car loans. Their financial affiliates will face much higher costs for funds, and automakers will have to pass along higher interest rates to customers and trim incentives.

If you genuinely need a new car, this may be the best time to get that good deal. Higher borrowing rates will hit the used car market hard, lowering your trade-in value—along with higher interest rates, that will push up the monthly payment on new vehicles.

Stock prices have soared—investors can’t get much interest on bonds, and dividend yielding stocks have been the best alternative.

As the Fed pushes up interest rates, well-rated corporate bonds and the debt of the better-run state governments will become attractive, and stocks, especially dividend paying stocks, will lose their appeal.

Overall, the stock market will be challenged to continue rallying, and ordinary investors should greet with great skepticism broker calls about can’t miss opportunities.

Most stock prices move with general trends in the market, and the opportunity your broker hails will have to be so good that it won’t likely be offered to ordinary retail investors.

The big shots on Wall Street will keep those hot prospects for themselves and the carriage trade—families big enough to be companies in their own right.

The percentage of take home pay Americans save has never been high, but lately we have been spending so freely that the percentage we put aside is now lower than a snake’s belly.

This is a good time to rethink the family budget. If you have credit card debt, pay it down as quickly as you can.

If you really need a larger home and are confident you can sell the home you own, and your job is very stable, this may be the best time to buy and lock in a mortgage rate you many not see again for a long time.

If you really need a home improvement loan—for example, much needed repairs you can’t do yourself or another room for the twins that unexpectedly arrived—now is the time.

Don’t borrow the money for a bigger SUV than you need or don’t need at all, or another wide screen TV. Sedans, older vehicles and smaller monitors will be cool again when interest rates surge.

It’s time to reflect on the lessons of the Great Recession. Families who are thrifty and only use credit for good purposes keep their homes from foreclosure, send their kids to college—without piling up excessive debt—and sleep better at night.





headline: Double jeopardy -- is this what's next for George Zimmerman?
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


While the country processes the racial politics-inspired prosecution of George Zimmerman, which came to a conclusion last week, and as the calls to try him in federal court for the same events for which he was acquitted in a state court become louder each day, a case in upstate New York is making its way through the system that profoundly reveals the antipathy to the Constitution displayed by some prosecutors in the U.S. Department of Justice and may give Zimmerman a foretaste of things to come.

Sitting patiently waiting for a Manhattan federal appeals court to order the government to obey the laws it has sworn to uphold is former New York state Sen. Joseph Bruno. Unlike many in the New York Legislature today, Bruno, a fiercely Catholic conservative Republican, was a pillar of legislative integrity, known even to his political adversaries as a man of his word. Once you shook his hand, you could count on his compliance with the agreement sealed by the handshake.

The justice for which the former state senator sits and waits is not based on any novel or arcane legal argument or any legislative loophole. It is a principle of law as old and as revered as the country itself. It is the constitutional prohibition against double jeopardy. Simply stated, the Obama administration wants to try him twice for the same alleged events, and he has asked a federal appeals court to prevent it from doing so.

If the government can violate a principle as fundamental and universally accepted as the prohibition on double jeopardy -- and do so in plain sight -- there is no limit to what it can do.

Here's what happened. In December 2009, Bruno was convicted by a federal district court jury in Albany, N.Y., of violating the federal "honest services" statute. Following the law as it then existed, the jury found that he had failed to inform the state of New York -- his employer in his capacity as a sitting state senator -- that he was also employed elsewhere. Being a New York state senator is a part-time job, and virtually all sitting state senators have other employment. Nevertheless, by this failure, he supposedly had denied the state his undivided, or "honest," services. He was not convicted of bribery; he wasn't charged with bribery. He was only charged with and convicted of violating this inane statute.

The statue is inane because it defies the age-old definition of "crime." Crime is harm -- generally, harm to the public order. This honest services statute has permitted Bruno and others to be prosecuted, not because their behavior caused any harm but because of their silence. But the statute was more than inane. It was also unconstitutional, because it punished silence; and silence is a natural right -- for which we don’t need the government’s permission to exercise and, as a consequence, with which we cannot receive the government’s heavy hand.

Last year, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously invalidated the honest services statute and ruled that the failure of an employee to tell one employer of his employment relationship with another employer, without any palpable harm to either employer, cannot be a crime in America.

As a result of that ruling, a Manhattan federal appeals court threw out Bruno's conviction. In a fair world, that would be the end of his ordeal. However, the Obama Department of (political) Justice obtained a new indictment against Bruno based upon the same set of facts that had formed the allegations of a violation of the honest services statute, but which it now claimed constituted bribery. The feds did this even though they had told the federal judge in the first trial nearly a dozen times that the state senator had not committed bribery and even though the witnesses who had testified for the government in the first trial uniformly stated when asked that Bruno had not been bribed.

Bruno's lawyers saw right through this old trick -- a trick that the kings of England played on their political opponents, including many Colonists. A trick so abominable that the Framers expressly prohibited it in the Constitution. The trick is played when the government calls the old crime -- the one for which the charges have ended favorably for the defendant -- by a new name, and presto ... it can try the defendant again, even though it lost the first round. Regrettably, a federal judge in Albany bought this argument. His decision to let the feds prosecute Bruno a second time for the same events as were subsumed in the first trial is now under appeal.

Can the feds legally do this? In a word: NO; obviously NO. And in the federal system, it is very rare for an appeals court to get involved in a case before the case has reached a conclusion in the trial court. The fact that the appeals court is even hearing Bruno's appeal at this stage -- before any second trial has taken place -- is a sign from the appeals court that the feds are not following the Constitution and the trial judge in Albany ought to have known that.

Joe Bruno -- nearing the end of his distinguished public career at age 84 -- is now a symbol of fidelity to the Constitution and an obstacle to a political Department of Justice that lacks that fidelity. If the government can violate a principle as fundamental and universally accepted as the prohibition on double jeopardy -- and do so in plain sight by changing the name of a charge -- there is no limit to what it can do.

Before he became a tyrant, Abraham Lincoln was a very successful trial lawyer. Demonstrating the propensity of an adversary to mislead, he once asked a jury, "If you call a tail a leg, how many legs does a dog have?" Then he answered: "Four, because calling a tail a leg doesn't make it a leg." Calling an old crime by a different name does not change its essence. A federal appeals court can put a stop to this miscarriage of justice, and it should do so before it spreads its ugly unconstitutional tentacles across the land and Joe Bruno has unwanted company.





headline: Five ways Obama can man up and punch back against Putin
byline: By K.T. McFarland


Across the commentariat pundits are wringing their hands over the Snowden affair, whining there is nothing the U.S. can do to stop Russia from granting him asylum.

For five years there has been a sparring match between the two most powerful presidents in the world -- Obama and Putin. Putin has won every round, and as a result he’s got all the leverage. Or so it would seem.

So what do you do when you don’t have leverage? You go and get some.

It's time for President Obama to man up and punch back. Being petty may not be something President Obama is comfortable with, but it is Putin's preferred method of operation. Unless Obama beats Putin at his own game he's unlikely to get the Russian president's attention or respect.

Putin seems to enjoy humiliating Obama and pushing back against American policies.

Originally President Obama tried to deal with Putin by offering grand gestures. He was rebuffed every time.

He offered to reset relations with Russia and had Secretary of State Clinton give Foreign Minister Lavrov an oversized computer button with "RESET" written in Russian. Putin responded by saying we didn't get the translation right.

Obama then cancelled the planned missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic as a goodwill gesture in hopes Putin would respond by canceling their cooperation with Iran's nuclear weapons program. Instead Russia ramped it up.

Obama recently offered to cut U.S. nuclear stockpiles by a third if Russia reciprocated. They said they might think about it, but only after the U.S. cut its missile defense program.

While Obama may be given to high minded rhetoric and sweeping proposals, Putin is decidedly not. The Russians have a very transactional approach to dealing with other countries -- it's always a tit for tat.

For example, when Congress passed the Magnitsky Act denying visas for a handful of Russians involved in the persecution and murder of a whistleblower, they responded by denying visas to Americans who wanted to adopt Russian orphans.

And now we have Mr. Snowden sitting in the transit lounge of Moscow airport.Putin already has gotten what he wanted out of Snowden – not just intelligence data, but knowledge of the methodology we use to gather intelligence.

He has also humiliated President Obama, who started out saying there would be serious consequences if Snowden wasn’t returned. When it became obvious Russia wasn’t giving him back, Obama was forced to dismiss Snowden as a 29-year-old hacker too insignificant to bother with.

According to Putin biographer Fiona Hill, the Russian president and former spymaster is a man who likes to get into people’s heads, to read them and then play to their weaknesses.

Every time the U.S. and Russian president have met Putin has lectured Obama on something -- on privacy, treason, Syria, Iran, even radical Islam.

Putin seems to enjoy humiliating Obama and pushing back against American policies. Why? Because he knows he can get away with it.

Can you imagine Putin trying to do the same to Reagan?

It’s time for the American president to do the same.It’s time to show Mr. Putin there are consequences to his actions. Only then will Putin stop exploiting President Obama, and trying to foil his every move. How best to make the point? Hit Putin where it hurts most – his ego.

The 60-year-old Putin recently divorced his matronly looking wife of thirty years to take up with a gorgeous, limber 30-year-old former Olympic gymnast.

When Obama claimed first dibs on the gym at the Dublin G-8 meeting recently, Putin one-upped him by inviting photographers to snap pictures of him doing a muscular breaststroke in an icy Irish lake.

While vacationing in Siberia, Putin posed bare-chested for a photo spread of himself horseback riding.

Watch the YouTube video of him crooning ‘Blueberry Hill’ to a group of Hollywood celebrities and notice how Putin’s face hardly moves – a dead giveaway of plastic surgery or Botox or both. This is a man who cares about his image. It’s time to rain on his parade.

First, cause some trouble at the upcoming September G-20 Summit meeting in St. Petersburg. Russia is the G-20’s new president– and it’s a symbol that they've arrived (or re-arrived) as a superpower.

Obama may not be able to organize a boycott of the entire G-20 summit, since the other 18 countries are mad because Snowden revealed the NSA was spying on them. But at a minimum Obama should cancel the one-on-one pre-summit meeting he was supposed to have in Moscow with Putin. It’s getting a little too crowded at the Moscow airport with Snowden living in the transit lounge.

Second, suggest that a top-tier American university is thinking of offering Russian dissident Alexei Navalny a fellowship once he gets out of jail for criticizing Putin and the Russian government. This position could be touted as similar to the one given to blind Chinese dissident and human rights activist Chen Guangcheng last year.

Third, talk up recent think tank reports that the Russian energy sector is in trouble. Leak stories that the U.S. intelligence community is studying the implications of the coming collapse of the Russian economy if they don’t get foreign investment and technology to develop new oil fields. Because, despite Putin’s new emphasis on creating new industries, Russia has failed to create an export economy outside of the energy industry. After all, who buys Russian cars, or computers or clothes?

Fourth, have the State and Defense Department officials suggest that, given recent advances in Iran’s nuclear program, we are taking a second look at reinstating the missile defense shield for Poland and the Czech republic.

Obama could stop in for a pre-summit meeting with the Polish president before going to the G-20 session, and bring along a few U.S. energy experts to discuss how the U.S. can help Poland develop their new natural gas discoveries.

Finally, hint that the U.S. has concerns about security for the upcoming Sochi winter Olympics, given the continuing unrest in Chechnya. As for those senators who suggest we should boycott the Olympics, how about instead we win every medal in sight. Can you imagine how Putin will feel if his gymnast girlfriend has to put a medal around an American neck?

This may sound more First Wives Club than diplomacy, but if the Russians want to play tit for tat, we need to beat them at their own game.

Obama may think actions like this are beneath him, but Putin does not.

Obama may not be threatened by Putin's pettiness, but Putin would be if the shoe was on the other foot...

If Putin realizes he's the one being humiliated, that working against the U.S. will cost him dearly, he may be more amenable to U.S. interests. One thing is certain -- the Mr. Nice Guy approach Obama has used with Putin heretofore hasn't worked.

As for Snowden – at this point he’s a liability for the Russians as well as us. They’ve got what they wanted from him, and we’re not getting him back.

U.S. and Russian mid-level officials should work behind the scenes to find a country Snowden can go to that gets the issue behind both of our countries.

Maybe Snowden can go to some lousy banana republic -- and spend the rest of his days in a third rate hotel, writing his memoirs while trying to get room service to deliver and the ceiling fan to work. Wikileaks can foot the bill.





headline: Obama just can't quit blame game as commander-in-chief
byline: By Michael Goodwin


“I’m no Dick Cheney,” sayeth Barack Obama. Now that he’s cleared that up, again, perhaps Obama can tell us who he is.

In his fifth year in the Oval Office, the president still defines himself by who he isn’t. Mostly, he reminds us he’s not George W. Bush or Vice President Dick Cheney. It’s a tiresome tic and doubly grating because of his insufferable air of moral superiority.

That was the gist of his defense of national security surveillance programs of the sort he denounced as a candidate.

Obama came into office apologizing for America, and he’s stuck being commander-in-chief of the lone superpower in a time of war.

“Some people say, ‘Well, you know, Obama was this raving liberal before. Now he’s, you know, Dick Cheney.’ Dick Cheney sometimes says, ‘Yeah, you know? He took it all lock, stock, and barrel,’” Obama said in a TV interview.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Congress must hold senior officials accountable for constitutional failures
byline: By Lt. Col. Tony Shaffer (ret.)


My 6-year-old son recently informed me that he’d be the “door holder” for his class during break time as I dropped him off at school.

He went on to tell me how much he had liked being the “line leader” they day before because “he got to help his class.”

He spoke with pride in being of service to his fellow students and that he had been entrusted to lead.

What a concept – entrusted to lead.

We have leaders in positions of great authority – men and women who have sworn to uphold, support and defend the Constitution of the United States. We’ve entrusted them to lead…and they do pretty much everything but that.

It is clear my six year old son has more leadership, and more interest in public good and public service than current policymakers.

Let’s examine for a moment the recent National Security Agency (NSA) debacle. The tale of government overreach has presented challenges and calls for debate. However, one of the factors lost in all the headlines is the cost to American taxpayers. When a high school drop-out can pull down upwards of $120K, that is indicative of a larger system that is bloated and out of control.

Yes – it was brilliant – General Keith Alexander’s defense on Capitol Hill regarding the NSA program phone and data collection programs. And how very impressive that they have “disrupted or prevented 50 terrorist attacks” since 9/11.

But however glossy and rich this defense was, it failed on two levels.

First, NSA is part of a larger global team of intelligence, law enforcement and military operators that all, in coordination, had to act together. This was part of an effort, and cannot be used successfully in a vacuum.

Second, there is the important matter of Fourth Amendment overreach which remains unaddressed and unanswered by any of Alexander’s comments.

Please note that 100% of the examples used by Alexander had foreign sources or starting points.

Once a U.S. citizen or entity is contacted by or affiliated with a terrorist individual or group, they become a valid interest by NSA; otherwise there is no possible justification for gathering any information on an innocent U.S. citizen to be retained by NSA or any other element of the intelligence community.

General Alexander, the director of NSA and commander of Cyber Command, sits atop an empire. The budget of NSA, not including Cyber Command, is estimated to be approximately $10 billion per year according to Steve Aftergood of the Federation of American Scientists. If you add Cyber Command into the picture we are talking about an effective doubling of the NSA budget to $20 billion.

Thanks to this we have created the Utah Data Center – a 1.5 million square foot building that will be collecting more data than the human mind can comprehend – at yottabyte levels – a yottabyteis equal to 500 quintillion pages.

This does not make us safer; this does not help us identify and neutralize terrorists.

How is it possible that a government agency charged with defending national security instead spends billions of dollars on programs that do nothing to protect us? It is possible because of a leadership failure.

Blame where blame is due.Congress has a large role to play in this debacle.

Congress funded a very expensive and highly dubious intelligence program that is lead by officers who do not have any understanding of ethics or doing the right thing.

Congress often knows (I’ve been told directly) that they are “lied to by executive branch” officers – and they accept it. 

Congressman Sensenbrenner, the author of the Patriot Act, is now acting to curtail what most now recognize as constitutional overreach regarding the amalgamation of data of U.S. citizens (not accused of any wrongdoing or crime).

There should have been no doubt in the minds of any of the current leadership – Director of National Intelligence Jim Clapper, Keith Alexander or anyone else who was fully “read-in” to the scope and focus of the program that it was inappropriately focused and unable to accomplish its two primary missions: focus on foreign terrorist targets and produce actionable information to target foreign terrorist groups and individuals.

But instead of adjusting to these facts, the intelligence agency leaders doubled, tripled and quadrupled down on their bad acts, building the “colossus” with Petabytes/Zetabytes of storage in the Utah hinterlands.

The need is for data quality not data quantity –and by increasing the scope and access to unusable/irrelevant data you are increasing the chances of failure, not success, in obtaining “actionable” data necessary to disrupt or prevent acts of terror.

It is clear my 6-year-old son has more leadership, and more interest in public good and public service than current policymakers.

This is a failure of leadership in the highest form at the highest level. Shame on these public servants for not only squandering the public trust, but also squandering the public’s money – money that has been spent on this massive data amalgamation and storage will not improve security or protect the American public in any demonstrative way.

There is little doubt that instead of being held accountable, both Clapper and Alexander will go off to work for some defense contractor for some seven figure salary when they are done.And we, as the tax payers, are left holding the bill for a program that will not work, cannot work, and has now retained information (illegally) on every single adult in the nation.

Now is the time for Congress to perform its Constitutional oversight function.They need to hold these senior officers accountable for their Constitutional failures.

They need to curtail the bad acts by these so-called leaders in their creation of the monstrous Utah Data Center.

They need to force NSA and Cyber Command to focus on foreign threats by funding programs that protect our national security and cutting the programs that do not. With our tax dollars and our national security at stake, Congress must step up.





headline: Stop insulting the Zimmerman jury
byline: By Tamara Holder


Civil rights groups and advocates’ response to the George Zimmerman “not guilty” verdict was so predictable: justice was not served.

Rev. Al Sharpton said the verdict was a “slap in the face.” NAACP Chairman Roslyn M. Brock stated, “Justice failed Trayvon Martin and his family.”

The undisputable facts are as follows: 

George Zimmerman shot and killed Trayvon Martin on a dark and rainy night on February 28, 2012. Zimmerman admitted to the killing but claimed he acted in self-defense. Zimmerman was charged with Second Degree Murder.

Lady Justice, the symbol of our judicial system, represents the six women who took an oath to reach a verdict based strictly on the evidence.

Approximately 16 months later, Zimmerman’s trial started. The prosecution and defense mutually agreed on a detailed juror questionnaire that was filled out by 211 potential jurors. Over the course of nine days, both sides sifted through every response, whittled their way down to 40 prospective jurors, and picked a final jury of 6, with four alternates.

Over the course of 14 days, the jury heard opening statements, viewed over 200 exhibits, and listened to the testimony of 56 witnesses (38 for the prosecution and 18 for the defense), and heard closing arguments.

The jury received detailed instructions on the elements required to find Zimmerman guilty of second degree murder, as well as a lesser-included offense of manslaughter.

On July 13, 2013, the jury of six women made a unanimous decision: “Not Guilty.”

The president of the Florida NAACP State Conference also chimed in: “Justice did not prevail,” said Adora Obi Nweze.

Justice did not prevail? How so?

In the same statement, Nweze said “Last year we pushed for the arrest of George Zimmerman and a thorough investigation and trial.”

Not only did “they” push for a trial, they received a trial.

Oh wait, the NAACP and other opponents of the verdict did not ask for a “fair trial.” They wanted a trial without the constitutional requirements of due process and an impartial jury.

The opponents’ message is clear: they believe in “selective” civil rights where race trumps gender and that the all-woman jury's unanimous decision was wrong.

Lady Justice, the symbol of our judicial system, represents the six women who took an oath to reach a verdict based strictly on the evidence presented in the four-corners of the courtroom.

A Martin family attorney told Greta Van Susteren, “We never endorsed that jury…They didn’t properly consider the evidence.” When I heard this baseless statement by a fellow member of the bar, I was disgusted.

Since when do prosecutors need approval from a victim’s family about the makeup of the jury?
The NAACP, Al Sharpton and others speaking out against the Zimmerman verdict clearly forgot that discrimination based on gender is also a civil rights violation.

These “leaders” are equally guilty of injustice: gender injustice. Six lady justices spoke. We do not have to agree with the decision but we must certainly respect every one of the six women and their collective, unanimous decision.





headline: Expect Samantha Power to continue Obama's disastrous U.N. policy
byline: By Anne Bayefsky


Wednesday’s confirmation hearing for Samantha Power, President Obama’s pick for U.N. ambassador, should not have been such smooth sailing. Over the past four and a half years the Obama administration’s U.N. policy has lurched from failure to failure and Power has not been a mere passenger along for the ride.

To name but a few disasters, there has not been a binding Security Council sanctions resolution on Iran since June 2010. Despite Washington’s numerous pleas, the Chinese reiterated this week that they were “not in favor of increased new pressure or sanctions against Iran.”

The Palestinians ignored the president’s personal appeal not to use the U.N. to upgrade their status unilaterally. With the U.S. voting against, “Palestine” became a U.N. non-member observer state.

Samantha Power is not a blank slate on Obama U.N. policy or President Obama’s use of the U.N. to intimidate our closest ally.  If confirmed, expect affairs to get worse.

Regardless of American views, U.N. jobs have been repeatedly filled by grossly inappropriate candidates.

- Iran is on the U.N.’s top women’s rights body.

- Both North Korea and Iran have served as President of the U.N. Conference on Disarmament.

- Richard Falk, the antisemitic, Boston-terror apologist, continues to hold the job of the UN’s Israel “investigator.”

- The U.N. has made zero progress in agreeing to a definition of terrorism. The drafting of a comprehensive convention against terrorism is hopelessly deadlocked.

- The U.N. held two more racist anti-racism conferences, “Durban II” in 2009 and “Durban III” in New York on the 10th anniversary of 9/11, over administration objections.

- Every substantive U.S. proposal to reform the Israel-bashing U.N. Human Rights Council was thrown out by the General Assembly in June 2011. The U.S. was outnumbered 154 to 4.

- In Syria, there are now over 100,000 deaths and yet U.N. investigators are waiting outside the country. Humanitarian access to Sudan is still blocked, while the killing in Darfur goes on.

The actual record, notwithstanding, Susan Rice ended her term by appearing before the cameras at U.N. Headquarters on June 25 and reciting a list of Team Obama’s purported achievements. Among other things, Rice claimed that she had saved American taxpayer dollars going to the U.N. and had created new “transparency.”

Actually, in 2010 the Obama administration stopped reporting the total U.S. contributions to the U.N. and has never produced this figure since. Every indication is that the amount has gone up, not down.

So where does Samantha Power fit in this sorry state of affairs? In general, Power will parrot the Obama/Rice mantra that it’s all about issuing in “a new era of engagement to the United Nations.”

In fact, Deputy National Security Advisor for Strategic Communications and Speechwriting, Ben Rhodes informs us that Power has already been hard at work applying the “engagement” agenda. The specifics reveal a troubling record on Israel, a subject which has become a touchstone for her appointment.

Speaking to the Israeli paper Haaretz in June – as part of an evident campaign to repair her pro-Israel credentials – Rhodes said: “Sam had been the point person at the White House on all issues related to Israel at the U.N.”

This is not a plus.

The U.N. Human Rights Council, the U.N.’s top human rights body, might be described as Israel-delegitimization headquarters. But instead of delegitimizing the delegitimizers, Power has urged the president to do just the opposite and lend the prestige of the world’s leading democracy to this human rights sham. Consistent with her advice, the administration joined the Council and remains a member.

An unnamed “senior U.S. official” also told Haaretz: “Power claimed…in discussions with the White House… that joining the Human Rights Council would give the United States better tools to protect Israel from discrimination…” and he continued: “It was manifestly true…We were able to rally Europeans to stand with us against anti-Israel resolutions…creating…a moral majority.”

The claim is manifestly untrue.

At its main annual anti-Israel session this past March, the Council adopted six anti-Israel resolutions and not a single European voted with the U.S. against even one of them.

Rhodes went further in his description of Power’s involvement. “Samantha has been the White House official in contact with our team in the Human Rights Council…She was helping set the policy but was also the person to sign off on the language of the statements the administration and our mission in Geneva issued.”

This is a damning admission. Israel has been refusing to engage with the Council for over a year – which is awkward for an administration claiming that engagement is doing just fine.

So this year in January and June, U.S. statements at the Council publicly encouraged Israel to re-engage. In effect, to return to the back of the bus. The public rebuke in such a hostile environment was wrong and it signals some ugly arm-twisting of Power’s Israeli “friends” behind the scenes.

Rhodes also said that Power was a key player in other Obama-U.N. moves: the U.S. decision to boycott the Durban II conference in 2009, the handling of the Turkish Mavi Marmara flotilla crisis in May 2010, and “stopping” the unilateral Palestinian initiative in the United Nations.

The real record: the administration refused to boycott Durban II until 48 hours before the conference and only after public pressure. The indecision ruined the ability of Israel and Jewish organizations to build a major coalition against the Durban Declaration.

On the Turkish flotilla incident, the administration allowed the matter to blossom into a U.N. Security Council presidential statement with almost unheard of speed.

Twenty-four hours after the event, the Council issued a statement which eventually subjected the Israeli defense forces to a U.N.-driven investigation – something the U.S. defense establishment would never have accepted. Turkish-Israel relations still suffer from the Turks having been encouraged to believe that they were wronged.

Samantha Power, therefore, is not a blank slate on Obama's U.N. policy or the president’s use of the U.N. to intimidate our closest ally. If confirmed, expect affairs to get worse.





headline: Why Obama doesn't dare speak about Detroit
byline: By Jon Kraushar


Does President Obama dare take the latest version of his revive-the-economy-and-boost-the-middle-class speech to the poster city for the bankruptcy of his ideas: Detroit?

Don’t bet on it.

You don’t hear the president talking about Detroit. Maybe the reason Detroit is bankrupt today is because for decades it was governed, in large part, by the Obama playbook: Soak the rich, choke small businesses, and squeeze the middle class with high taxes (in the case of Detroit that included sky high property, commercial and industrial taxes).

Out of control taxing and spending by government in Detroit was one reason a staggering 25 percent of the city’s population moved out between 2000 and 2010.

A study by the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy in 2011 found that Detroit had the highest property taxes among the 50 largest U.S. cities on homes, apartment buildings, commercial buildings, and industrial buildings.

Yet President Obama keeps saying that he wants to tax the wealthy and businesses much more across the country to redistribute income to the middle class, the poor, and government.

Detroit tried that (with most of the money going down the government spending rat hole instead of to its citizens).

Maybe the reason Detroit is bankrupt is because for decades it was governed, in large part, by the Obama playbook.

Detroit stands as an extreme example of how an Obama tax system of “spreading the wealth” (actually, confiscating it) inevitably means that since there is not enough rich and business people’s money to create a utopia of income equality -- government must inevitably tax middle income people, too.

Worse, most of the money ends up in government’s coffers where it gets misspent and siphoned to special interests—instead of in the pockets of citizens whose spending and investing stimulates economic and job growth. 

Here's how that works: Insure that unions and government workers get generous pension, health and other benefit packages that government can’t fund, long-term, in exchange for their votes and political activism.

According to the Cato Institute’s Michael Tanner, “Fully 99.6% of [Detroit’s] retiree health-care liabilities are unfunded” and…“unfunded obligations account for $9.2 billion of Detroit’s $18 billion debt.”

Shortly before President Obama delivered his nearly 8,000-word “economic success” speech at Knox College in Galesburg, Illinois last week (without once mentioning the word “Detroit”) Moody’s downgraded the credit rating of Obama’s home city of Chicago, Illinois by three notches. This was largely because Moody’s calculated Chicago’s unfunded liabilities at $36-billion—nearly double of what the Windy City reported.

Looking at other cities across the country, Moody’s estimates that cities are using accounting gimmicks to disguise their true unfunded government pension liabilities, which Moody’s says are three times as bad as those cities are reporting. But if President Obama would dare to talk about this in Detroit (or in Chicago, for that matter), he would alienate unions and government workers who are among his biggest backers.

Instead, government officials strive to sell the power of big government to be the savior when it comes to major economic and social problems.

Detroit’s mayors over the past 30 years tried various forms of government intervention to invigorate the city but clearly that failed. As Steve Malanga recently wrote in The Wall Street Journal, as early as the 1970’s, when Coleman Young was Detroit’s mayor, “the increasingly distressed city became a fiscal ward of the state and federal governments…by the late 1970s federal grants paid the salaries of up to one-third of Detroit's workforce.”

As Detroit continued to demonstrate over the years, government bailouts only forestall problems that only responsible individuals must solve.

Mr. Obama did dare to speak of his economic vision in Detroit, in 2007, just a few months after he declared his first bid for the presidency.

At the Detroit Economic Club, Obama said, “I believe in America's great cities. I believe in America's great Midwestern cities. We have not had an urban agenda over the last six years. We need to restore an urban agenda.”

He cited as his top priorities: education, “innovative ways that the federal government can spark economic development,” and then touched on the topics of affordable housing and jobs.

Obama added that, “Obviously, the marketplace is the best engine of job growth.”

In the six years since Obama spoke those words—and six months into his second term as president—President Obama is still campaigning as if big government can fix major economic and social problems in all the areas he cited as his priorities when he spoke at the Detroit Economic Club.

But the Obama administration’s role in bailing out Detroit’s auto industry didn’t “save Detroit”—certainly not the city.

While Obama pushes for even more big government taxing and spending, here’s what we see:

- Failed schools, especially in the minority neighborhoods of big cities.

- Real GDP growth that is limping along at barely over one percent.

- When it comes to affordable housing and job growth, Obama is long on claiming credit and short on producing results. 

While the Obama playbook continues to play out in Detroit and elsewhere, the president continues to speak as if he and his administration are on the right track.

If the president ever does dare to speak in Detroit, expect from him what he accuses his critics of: “an endless parade of distractions, political posturing and phony scandals.”





headline: Edward Snowden -- Putin's pawn of the month
byline: By Matthew Dunn


This week, there has been a new development in the Edward Snowden road show. The former NSA technician, turned PRISM whistleblower, has been told by Russia he may be able to leave the Moscow airport and enter the country. If that's true and happens, whatever the future holds for him, I suspect it’s going to be bleak.

We’ve no evidence that he’s a Russian spy, and even though it’s likely he will have cooperated with the Russian authorities, that doesn’t mean he’ll be given a hero’s welcome in the motherland.

History shows that even some of the most important Western spies who’ve worked for Russia or the USSR before fleeing to live there have died in miserable squalor, as paupers and jokes.

There’s one thing Edward Snowden will learn about Russians: they hate weakness.

Look at the latter days of the infamous but very successful British Cambridge spy ring members who defected to Moscow in the 1950s.

Despite comprehensively betraying the West on behalf of the Soviet Union, when in exile in Moscow they were put under 24/7 surveillance by the KGB and every aspect of their lives were bugged by the Soviets who never truly trusted them.

The spy ring knew that and drank vodka and cheap champagne to numb the pain of their hellish existence until the booze inevitably killed them.

Snowden’s nowhere near the professional and intellectual league of Kim Philby, Donald Maclean, and Guy Burgess, so his prospects are far worse.

Whatever you think about the startling revelations about PRISM, Snowden’s a nomad with a grudge and a story to tell. Worse, he’s a weak man who lacked the courage to stay in the United States and defend his self proclaimed righteous cause. He may regret that, because there’s one thing he will learn about Russians: they hate weakness.

It doesn’t end there.As a former MI6 field operative, I can tell you that intelligence officers respect the counterparts they combat in the secret war, and the foreign assets who work for all sides and put their lives on the line to spy on their country.

We’re all professionals, doing a very tough, complex, sometimes chaotic, always dangerous, job and the mutual respect we have for each other is no different from that found between two opposing armies of highly trained soldiers.

That respect is extant, even if we have no hesitation in destroying our enemies to obtain our objectives.But whether you’re a CIA, MI6, or Russian SVR operative, no intelligence professional likes an aggrieved snitch like Snowden who thinks he’s better than the entire intelligence apparatus he worked alongside in a lowly position.

President Vladimir Putin will have personally authorized Snowden’s transition into Russia. But Putin himself is a former lieutenant colonel in the KGB and I suspect he will be viewing Snowden with utter contempt.

So why did Putin make the decision to allow the former NSA traitor to stay in Moscow and potentially Russia itself in turn send a strong Russian signal of provocation to America?

Why didn’t it serve him up on a plate to the United States in return for significant political or economic favors?

It’s not the first time this year that Russia has favored petulance and antagonism towards America over canny back-channel realpolitik.

In May, it captured CIA officer Ryan Fogel during an undercover operation in Moscow, humiliated and berated him on camera, before chucking him out of Russia

The reason why Russia didn’t play clever with the Snowden situation rests solely with Vladimir Putin’s fears and lack of confidence in his state.

He needs the support of a vast populous, and believes the best way to do that is to act like a throwback to former European dictators, bang his chest, pretend to be the strong man, pout, and antagonize America.

He’s making a pretty good job of doing that and a lousy job of presenting himself as an international statesman.

None of which helps Edward Snowden. He’s Putin’s pawn of the month, and if he's eventually allowed into Russia, it's quite possible he'll soon be shuffling along the streets of Moscow with only a few rubles in his pocket and with no idea where he’s headed.





headline: Even liberal media isn't falling for Obama's tired economic message
byline: By Dan Gainor


Forget Obama’s enemies. Even MSNBC turned critic after his latest lame economic speech this week.

Of course, that’s easy. Just don’t ask most liberal journalists about the many Obama scandals – IRS, Associated Press, Rosen, Benghazi, etc. – they will claim that the president is scandal free.

Still, you take what little you can get.

On the network’s “Morning Joe,” host Joe Scarborough was joined by NBC’s Chuck Todd skewering the president during post-speech analysis.

Todd, NBC’s chief White House correspondent, agreed that the speech was a rehash of what Obama has done before.

Scarborough kicked off the criticism by asking Todd a simple question: “What new did you hear yesterday that was new?”

“I didn’t hear anything new,” responded Todd. “I remember asking this veryquestion.I always say, remind people thefirst three letters of the word‘news’ is n-e-w, right?At the end of the day, a news organization is chargedwith telling you what's new.”

According to Todd, this was “more of a tacticalspeech.” But even for an economic speech, it didn’t just focus on jobs and related it issues.

“He spent a great deal of timeabout health care.And rightfully so.He's got a big challenge aheadof him.But, if you're looking for the new,no, there wasn't new in there,” said Todd, who added that the speech seemed designed to reinvigorate a “flagging” White House.

Even MSNBC turned critic after President Obama's latest lame economic speech this week.

Scarborough piled on, even citing a similarly critical column from The Washington Post’s Dana Milbank describing the speech as “a warmed over jobs message.” In his column, the liberal Milbank called it “roughly the 10th time the White House has made such a pivot to refocus on jobs and growth.”

“Reelection does not legitimizeyou in the eyes of your mostvocal opponents and it's got to be frustrating ashell,” said Scarborough. “Dana Milbank wrote about thespeech in The Washington Post.He said, ‘a warmed-over jobsmessage.Even a reincarnated Steve Jobswould have trouble marketingthis turkey.How can the president make newsand remake the agenda bydelivering the same message hegave in 2005?He's even giving the speech fromthe same place, Galesburg,Illinois.’”

Scarborough then added the Milbank kicker, ideal for summer TV. “And so the president, it seems, is going into reruns.”

Todd has been honest on both NBC and MSNBC about this latest presidential bout of speechmaking.

In the “Daily Rundown” this week, he admitted it was yet another pivot to the economy. “He’s said it all before, so he doesn’t have anything new to say.”

And in an appearance on “Nightly News,” he said the entire trip was designed as a distraction.

“When presidents are in trouble andthings aren't going well inWashington they do one thing.They get out of Washington,” explained Todd.

Remember, this was said on the left-leaning network MSNBC. This wasn’t a conservative Joe Scarborough here.

Scarborough was recently profiled by New York magazine which called him, “the liberal’s favorite talk-show host.”The Joe of “Morning Joe” has gone after the NRA, bashed George Zimmerman as a “murderer” and regularly attacked Fox News. But it all added up to a clear assessment that Obama had failed in his job to help others find jobs of their own.

On the media side, it was a rare example of the folks at MSNBC doing any job other than PR for the president.

Now, if only they, or anyone else in the media, would do a little digging into how the IRS chief counsel’s office may have been involved in targeting of Tea Party and conservative groups by our supposedly neutral government.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Human trafficking will not end until it ends in India
byline: By Brent Martz


For generations, 300 million Dalits—the poorest of the poor in India—have been taught that they are worthless.

Less than human.

Excluded from society, they have limited access to education or justice.

They are used, cheated, and abused freely by others.

They are given no protection by law enforcement; no access to the courts; no political voice; no hope of upward mobility.

With no resources and no hope, many Dalit women and children succumb to India’s thriving human-trafficking industry.

But with 27 million modern-day slaves around the world, 100,000 of which are child prostitutes in the United States, why do the Dalits matter?

By bringing an end to human trafficking in the number one source and destination for human trafficking victims in the world, we can end trafficking across the globe.

The Dalits matter because human trafficking will not come to an end around the world, until it comes to an end in India.

Didn’t the End It Movement already raise enough awareness of human trafficking to make a mark for 2013? Do we really need another organization shouting their anti-trafficking cause from the rooftops?

Yes, we do. And here’s why:

- Buying and selling human beings is larger now than any other time in history, and it includes a global industry built on forcing children into sex.

- India is the epicenter of human trafficking—including 100 million people, with 1.2 million child prostitutes. It tops the list of countries when it comes to transit, destination and source of human trafficking victims. According to the United Nations, the most dangerous place in the world to a girl or woman is India.

- Two hundred thousand Indian children a year are sold into slavery, many by their parents for a mere $17 dollars.

- Dalits are uneducated and illiterate, and have been taught for hundreds of years that they are worthless. They have no idea the caste system, in which they are the bottom of the proverbial food chain, has beenoutlawed. They have no idea they have rights. They have no idea they are human.

The Indian government prefers it this way. Elected officials and local police are members of the “outlawed” upper caste, so why would they want to protect the Dalits and eliminate India’s slave labor force? They don’t.

Awareness is huge, and great progress has been made on that front. But in addition to shouting, we need people doing.

But what can be done to end such a massive problem? What can be done to reverse the endless generations living life as Dalits with no self worth?

Education.

And by education, I don’t mean scholarships. I mean holistic education: the purchase of land, construction of a permanent facility and the employment of permanent teachers.

Dalits need schools where they can learn. Where they can exercise the brain they don’t know they have. Where they can discover self worth. Where their hunger to be known, to learn, to grow and to live can be fed.

Dalits need teachers who believe in them. Teachers who show them love, patience, kindness, and tenderness they’ve never experienced. Teachers who make sure their students feel valued and worthy of life.

Dalits need community. A community budding with hope and pride, stemming from the newfound self worth children are discovering each day in school. A village transformed into a community by sports, arts and community events held at school.

The Dalits desperately need another organization committed to the prevention of human trafficking through education.

Enter the Not Today Coalition.

Born out of more than 10 years of work by the members Friends Church in Yorba Linda, Calif., Not Today Coalition is working to prevent the exploitation of the Dalits of India by transforming lives through education and restoration for Dalit families and villages.

Hundreds of Friends Church members have travelled to India to see and experience the work first hand, built 40 schools, funded many adult vocational training centers, and sponsored 1,500 children.

But now it’s time to grow. Now it’s time to show the Dalits they’re not forgotten. Now it’s time for you to act.

By educating the Dalits, we can help bring an end to human trafficking in India. By bringing an end to human trafficking in the number one source and destination for human trafficking victims in the world, we can end trafficking across the globe.

It is our goal to fund 1,000 schools, affecting 25,000 Dalit communities, impacting 500,000 Dalit children per year.

And we can’t do it without you.





headline: Republicans must resist game of chicken with president over ObamaCare
byline: By Karl Rove


President Obama would love nothing more than Republicans’ providing him a bully pulpit and big stick with which he can beat them daily through the 2014 midterm elections. That’s what the Republicans would give Mr. Obama if they shut down the government by trying to defund ObamaCare in the Continuing Resolution (CR) to fund the federal government after October 1.

That’s because the Continuing Resolution only affects discretionary spending. Virtually all of ObamaCare costs are mandatory spending, unaffected by what’s in the CR. Defunding ObamaCare in the CR would not affect spending for the expansion of Medicaid, which is almost half of ObamaCare’s cost. Nor would it affect the Exchanges – the subsidies for insurance coverage – that’s also mandatory spending. 

In fact, as little as 1% or 2% of ObamaCare’s outlays for the first ten years would be affected by adding to the CR a provision defunding ObamaCare. 

This could translate into significantly less than $10 billion in discretionary spending cut for FY14. And the Obama administration could find some of that money in this year’s budget or in funds they can move around or simply go without. 

Mr. Obama would love for the GOP to threaten a shutdown over $10 billion in ObamaCare funding, while ObamaCare continues to get over a $1.5 trillion over the next 10 years. Senator Tom Coburn is absolutely right to say such a strategy could lose the House for the GOP.

Remember, when Republicans shut down the government in 1995, they had funded half the fiscal year’s budget including all of defense and still the GOP lost badly in the court of public opinion. 

This time, if no CR is passed by September 30 of this year, nothing has been funded. That means there's zero for defense. So the troops won’t get paid…starting the first week of October. And other essential services will stop because there won’t be any money at all, unlike 1995.

Rather than risking a shutdown of the government over less than $10 billion, Republicans should go on the offense, highlighting the president’s threat to shut down the government unless he gets $91 billion more in new spending in the CR. Republicans are for holding the line on spending; Mr. Obama wants more.

ObamaCare is a train wreck. Republicans’ warnings about the law are now coming true. Premiums are going up; people are losing their health plans; companies are cutting their employees’ hours, costs are far more than estimated and hence the debt bigger that thought as well.

The GOP has better ground fighting against ObamaCare whose problems will grow as implementation gets underway. House Republicans can use their power of oversight to keep drawing attention to the law’s many shortcomings. They can attempt to repeal parts of ObamaCare or seriously alter some of its provisions, as the House GOP did when it pressed the issue of delaying the individual mandate when the Obama administration delayed the employer mandate.

The GOP must also offer alternatives. A Crossroads GPS poll from last month showed strong backing for conservative reforms that reduce costs. For example, 81% support letting families save more tax-free for out-of-pocket health expenses, 82% are in favor of allowing individuals to purchase health insurance with pretax dollars, and 78% back the sale of insurance across state lines.

ObamaCare’s unpopularity suggests that Republicans can win on health care—but must resist a game of chicken with the president.



Karl Rove is a Fox News political analyst and a former senior adviser and deputy chief of staff to President George W. Bush. He is the author of "Courage and Consequence: My Life as a Conservative in the Fight" (Threshold Editions, 2010) and helped organize the political action committee American Crossroads.



headline: Is Iraq doomed?
byline: By Lt. Col. Tony Shaffer (ret.)


Chaos in the Middle East is nothing new.

What we consider in our western perception as “instability” others would consider a normal state of play.

As the Billy Joel Song goes “we didn’t start the fire” – many of the religious conflicts go back two thousand years.

Still, while this is all true, we chose to involve ourselves in the region’s affairs, and we do have continued interests in the long term stability and success of nations in this region– especially Iraq.

What we need to be aware of is the potential for Iraq to become another base of operations for Al Qaeda to further destabilize Syria. 

Within the past year in Iraq, there has been continued factional violence – and just last month there were 600 Iraqis killed in various forms of car bombings and acts of terror.

This is not the greatest level of violence we’ve seen in the post-invasion Iraq (in 2006-2007, there were losses of 3,000 per month), but it is significant and troubling. 

The United States invested great quantities of blood and treasure into bringing stability to Iraq – with our ‘surge’ of forces in 2007 which resulted in the “Sunni Awakening” which was instrumental in the material defeat of Al Qaeda – or so we thought

The question we must ask ourselves now is simply – did we leave before the investment we made was ready to pay dividends to the Iraqi people?

There are complex issues regarding the three primary groups who inhabit the current borders of Iraq – the Kurds, the Sunni Muslims and Shia Muslims – the latter two being the predominate elements in conflict as the Kurds have begun to function, in the north, as a semi-autonomous (and stable) state. 

The Sunni, backed (or at least influence by) the Saudi Arabian government; the Shia backed (or heavily influenced by) the Iranian government.

It is this constant flux of factional religious violence that has made Iraq more and more unstable – and, as we observed this past week, a location full of chaos that has drawn to it Al Qaeda.

The Shiite-led (pro-Iran) government has become more and more “one party rule” in which members of the Sunni factions have been removed – many of the Sunni members of the government were removed just after the U.S. military forces departure, in 2011.

One of the notable observations that is key to the current situation in Iraq, as we saw recently in Egypt, is that political elements that are excluded from having a voice and role in government will turn on and attack that government.

Egyptian President Morsi found out this fact the hard way – with his forcible removal by a popularly supported coup (although many don't want to call by that name).

Sunni Muslim militants are continuing to expand their efforts to attack the central government – which will continue to destabilize the nation, and present opportunities for radical elements to resurge as well.

This militant violence has been an opportunity for Al Qaeda to regain its footing and begin to operate with impunity as we saw in the massive (and operationally sophisticated) jail break of more than 500 prisoners from Iraq’s Abu Ghraib prison this month.A prison in Taji – was also hit but the quick action of guards prevented escapes. The two prisons attacked simultaneously by Al Qaeda show that the terror group is back in force and plenty effective.

The Pentagon had, prior to our departure in 2011, planned to maintain a small but robust military footprint in Iraq – there were negotiations for a ‘status of forces’ agreement that would have allowed a continued military advice and assistance role, as well as counter-terrorism.

Frankly, part of that role was to serve as a guarantor of continued economic and governmental stability – as we were able, through both direct and indirect influence, able to help make sure the Iraqi fledgling democracy was ‘inclusive’ and allowed for all the voices of the various factions of the Iraqi people to be heard. That ended with our departure.

So – without debating the merits of the 2003 invasion – did we leave Iraq too early?

Have we left, in serious doubt, the sustainability of a democracy we helped create?

At its time of its greatest stress, will it flounder?

The breakdown in negotiations in our “status of forces agreement between the Iraqi government and the U.S. government was used to justify our pullout in 2011 – but it was clear then as now, that “breakdown” was the perfect excuse for the Obama White House to abandon the mission.

What is more troublesome is the fact that we now see Al Qaeda growing. It is significant enough that they are now active and conducting effective operations in Iraq.What we need to be aware of is the potential for Iraq to become another base of operations for Al Qaeda to further destabilize Syria.

We still have not sorted out who exactly we are “for” and “against” within the cloud of chaos that is now the insurgency in Syria. Instead of having a stalwart Iraqi as an ally who we could be working with, and using their nation as a base of operations, we have an Iraq that is less than reliable, and may be teetering on the brink of its own collapse.

So – when we look back at the purely political decision to remove all U.S. forces from Iraq, what are we to think? Have we made the very task of “doing something” in Syria even more difficult by our shortsighted policy regarding Iraq?

Most military planners and experts would agree there were strategic interests and reasons to maintain some level of credible and effective military force in Iraq; it was a purely political decision to remove our forces from Iraq.

And now, the apparent downside of that political decision is now become more apparent -- and will likely haunt us as we attempt to conduct military operations in the region -- and more importantly continue to pursue Al Qaeda, which is not, by any analyst’s account “on the run.”

In short, for some sort of meaningful democracy, that guaranteed individual rights, to succeed in Iraq what was almost certainly required was a sustained U.S. presence. It was needed so that Iraq could make the two generation transition in its citizens to begin to think like a democracy. 

To quote a retired senior intelligence officer “The U.S. leaving in a huff because the negotiations became hard almost certainly dooms that transition to sustainable democracy…”

Has our political rush to abandon the U.S. mission in Iraq now resulted in the likelihood of more chaos in Syria spilling over from Iraq and a resurgence of Al Qaeda? So far, the evidence is “yes”.





headline: Does Obama want Egypt to choose between aid and freedom?
byline: By Raymond Stock


On Friday, the chief of Egypt’s military, General Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, has urged all Egyptians to come out on the street to give him a “public mandate to face up to terror” in confronting the Muslim Brotherhood and its Salafi allies.

A military source told Cairo’sahramonlinethat these demonstrations will be “as big almost” as the fifteen-to-thirty million thought to have marched against President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood on June 30.

Those protests, called the largest in human history, promptedal-Sisito remove the Islamist leader on July 3, just over a year after Morsi was very narrowly elected and sworn into office on June 30, 2012.

At the same time, President Obama, citing a law that automatically cuts off aid to any regime installed by a military coup against an elected government, withheld the scheduled shipment of four F-16 fighter jets to Egypt this week.

Obama appears to be asking Egyptians to choose between their freedom and aid from the U.S.

Though the Bright Star joint training exercises between our military and theirs will apparently go on as planned,The New York Timessaid on July 24 that the administration “wanted to send …a signal of American displeasure with the chaotic situation there, which has been marked by continued violence, the detention of Mr. Morsi and other leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood, and a transition that has not included the Brotherhood.”

Thus Obama is not so much following the law as bending it for his own purposes.

By doing this now, Obama appears to be asking Egyptians to choose between their freedom and aid from the U.S.

For most, the choice is simple.A future without the Muslim Brotherhood--which since losing power has taken over streets and squares in often violent protests, worked with Al Qaeda-affiliated terrorist groups in Sinai that are targeting both security officials and Coptic priests, is suspected in a growing bombing campaign against public buildings, and declared that it will never compromise on its demand to restore Morsi as president—is the only one possible for them.

There is already a widespread movement to tell us where to put the F-16s if it means taking the Brothers back with them.

After a year underMorsi--who from July 3 was held without charges until today, when he was formally accused of being sprung from prison along with others during the 2011 uprising against then-President Hosni Mubarak by Hamas gunmen--thevast majority of Egyptians know that the Brotherhood is not moderate and has lost all legitimacy, even if many voted for them before.

They rose up after Morsi gave himself powers greater than any pharaoh (ancient or modern), and tried to turn Egypt into a one-party, Sharia-based dictatorship.

They watched in mounting horror as the Muslim Brotherhood and the Salafis burned churches and murdered Christians and Shiites, tried to sack non-Islamist judges and prosecutors, persecuted liberal activists, reporters and comedians, attacked secular protesters and freed scores of convicted terrorist killers from prison, while driving the economy out of control.

Yet not only did U.S. aid continue, the administration avoided virtually all criticism of Morsi.

Ironically, only now, when those who want to create a more secular and genuinely democratic government are finally given the chance (however slim) to do so, and when the ousted Islamists are fomenting chaos all over the country, have the deliveries stopped.

But rather than pressuring the determined military, the prolonged deliberations over calling Morsi’s removal a “coup” will simply give the Islamists hope that America will restore them to power, over the objections of far more citizens than voted for Morsi.

Meanwhile, it makes many Egyptians think that our president prefers extremists to actual moderates.

Sadly, if Obama hadn't supported the Muslim Brotherhood, you could blame them for their paranoia about U.S. intentions. And yet, ever since his June 4, 2009 speech to the Islamic world from Cairo, which he insisted that the then-outlawed group’s leaders be asked to attend (thus excluding his“friend,” Mubarak),he has seen the anti-Western, anti-female, anti-gay and anti-Semitic Brotherhood as Egypt’s future.

Still, the U.S. should place conditions on aid. But rather than demand inclusion of the irreconcilable Muslim Brotherhood and other Islamists, or even a too-rushed return to an elected government in a nation so divided, Washington should tie its largesse to the protection of religious minorities, secularists, women and gays.And rather than being almost wholly military, we should gradually shift our assistance as much (or more) into development as arms.

Sixty-one years ago today in Alexandria, on July 26, 1952, after a U.S.-supported military coup, Farouk—Egypt’s constitutional monarch (her last)--was forced to abdicate and sail for Italy, ending the country’s first experiment with democracy.

That move led to horrific disasters both at home and abroad, with six decades of army rule, albeit with a civilian face.

Egypt’s next coup—on February 11, 2011 (again backed by the U.S.)--was in response to the largest protests then seen there in living memory.

Neither featured demonstrations even close to those witnessed last month.Whether or not the military’s predictions about today come true, we should all hope that they succeed in defeating Egypt’s worst enemies: they are ours too.





headline: Mr. Obama, here's how to really boost incomes and fight inequality
byline: By Peter Morici


Slow growth and increasing inequality are ripping the social fabric of America—vanquishing the dreams of working families, saddling the young with onerous student debt and frustrating retirement plans.

President Obama is stirring passions proposing government initiatives he hopes will stifle House Republican efforts to curb federal spending, but those can only end in tears.

Early in his first term, he pushed through more than $4 trillion in deficit spending on stimulus, broader Medicaid benefits, alternative energy projects and other industrial policies. Through last fall, growth was an anemic 2.1 percent and has since slowed by half.

Obama is stirring passions proposing government initiatives he hopes will stifle House Republican efforts to curb federal spending, but those can only end in tears.

He blames sequestration, which subtracted about $45 billion from government spending. However, his rhetoric ignores $200 billion in higher taxes he demanded from Congress in January, and the doubling of the trade deficit on oil and with China to $540 billion since the recovery began.

Sequestration will remove about 1 million jobs, while higher taxes and the trade deficit will cost Americans more than 10 times as many.

Instead of forcefully confronting Chinese for cheating on trade in ways recommended by liberal and conservative economists alike, Obama merely pleads with Beijing. The Middle Kingdom responds with criminal activity—pirated commercial technology costs U.S. companies at least $300 billion a year and American workers about 5 million jobs.

Oil and gas production is up on private and state lands in South Dakota and elsewhere, but the president keeps drilling locked down on federally-controlled reserves off the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts, and in the Eastern Gulf and Alaska. Oil imports could be eliminated, but instead the president promotes alternative energy projects—similar to Solyndra—that enrich his political friends.

Government subsidized electric cars are a bust, whereas private investments in more fuel-efficient internal combustion engines and hybrids are delivering big gains. Ford—which received no bailout money—is rolling out one eye-popping high MPG model after another.

ObamaCare mandates are driving up health care costs for large businesses on full time employees. No surprise, since January 833,000 more Americans have reported working part-time, while 97,000 fewer have full-time positions.

Income inequality is getting worse. The pay of ordinary workers is stagnating, while CEO compensation at large companies increased 16 percent last year. 

Top executives have accomplished a compensation cartel by serving on each other’s boards of directors and tying up votes in shareholder elections through proxies. They vote one another outlandish salaries and block accountability to investors.

The Justice Department is charged with protecting Americans against such anti-competitive behavior but is too busy intimidating reporters, slow-walking investigations of IRS abuses and harassing Texas election officials for discriminatory conduct that has been dead 50 years.

Wall Street’s big banks have exploited Dodd-Frank to scarf up smaller banks that cannot cope with the avalanche of new regulations, and thereby monopolized the CD market in many cities. Even as mortgage rates have risen, the elderly are not being offered decent returns that once helped finance their retirements. Increasingly, they work in grocery stores and wait on tables, competing down the wages of the younger working poor.

Don’t look for the Justice Department to investigate CD rate rigging. Democrats raise too much campaign money on Wall Street for Attorney General Holder to take an interest.

A roll-back of recent tax increases, tough responses to Chinese cheating on trade and theft of intellectual property, developing more domestic oil, scrapping ObamaCare, and a Justice Department that investigates monopoly behavior that hurts ordinary Americans would raise incomes and combat inequality.

The last thing American families need is more of the same failed Obama policies.





headline: Our government's foolish view of US energy revolution
byline: By Gary Schmitt, Adam Kennedy


Wednesday, President Obama gave an address on the U.S. economy at Knox College in Illinois in which he argued that the future looks much brighter for the country in part because the energy revolution in natural gas taking place right under our feet. But, disappointingly, neither the president nor Congress are making the most of this revolution and, hence, are reducing the economic benefits that would come from more drilling and more exports of this now abundant resource.

The fact is, America today is awash in natural gas.

Through technological advances in tapping into shale rock formations, the amount of recoverable natural gas reserves has grown by nearly 800 percent over the past seven years, with estimates that the United States has more than a century’s worth of supplies on hand.

The result has been a sharp and sustained decrease in the price of gas and, with that drop in energy prices, the prospect of a revitalized American manufacturing base and the jobs that will come with it.

Indeed, America’s natural gas reserves are so great that one study after the other has concluded that the U.S. can export natural gas with only marginal increases in prices here at home.

Not only would exporting gas abroad help reduce the country’s trade deficit and create additional jobs, but it would also have the strategic benefit of reducing the energy dependence of friends and allies on Putin’s Russia and states in the unstable Middle East—and, in turn, creating new and deeper ties to those same friends and allies.

When it comes the export of natural gas, U.S. policy is at odds with what’s economically sound for the country.

Countries such as Japan, South Korea and India are lining up to become long-term buyers of American natural gas if only the U.S. government would clear the path for American companies to build the necessary infrastructure to liquefy the gas and make it exportable globally.

But here’s the rub. Under U.S. law, the decision to license natural gas exports rests with the Department of Energy and, for a license to be issued, the department must determine that those exports are in the “public interest.”​

The only exception being that, for countries with which the U.S. has a free-trade agreement, it’s assumed that gas exports meet that standard. Allies who have not signed an FTA with the U.S. (such as Japan, the United Kingdom or Lithuania), or strategic partners (like India and Taiwan) must face a higher hurdle before a license can be granted.

Over the past two years, the Energy Department has granted just two separate authorizations to export domestic-sourced natural gas to non-FTA countries, and other approvals have been slow in coming. The export application line is growing longer by the day, with 20 new license requests having been filed and still under review as of May of this year.

The problem with this slow pace of approvals and the more restrictive guidelines for non-FTA countries is that, when it comes to natural gas, “you snooze, you lose.”

Importing states have potential alternatives, such as acquiring gas from Australia, Canada, Nigeria and Russia. And once companies make the billions in investments necessary to bring that gas online and transport it, they have even less incentive to make similar investments here in the United States. In short, the apparent slow-rolling of approvals by the Obama energy team has significant opportunity costs both economically and strategically.

Moreover, there are real questions about whether the U.S. laws governing the export of natural gas run afoul of our commitments under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), whose governing body is the World Trade Organization.

Under Article XI (“General Elimination of Quantitative Restrictions”) of GATT, the United States and other signatories have pledged not to adopt measures that would curtail the export of any good, with the key exception being the “conservation” of some good or commodity demonstrably in critical shortage. However, given the glut of domestic gas reserves—a glut that will continue as far as the eye can see—it’s hardly plausible that the administration could use this GATT exception to justify the current law or policies.

Finally, if the U.S. were to claim this exception, under WTO rules, it would have to impose regulations to curtail domestic production and consumption of gas as a sign that the government is serious about conserving natural gas.

Yet no such regulations or proposed laws have been put forward. Quite the opposite, domestic manufacturers, electric power companies and chemical firms are pushing for as rapid a development of shale gas fields as possible.

Defending the current export regime for natural gas also requires Washington to ignore its own record of challenging other countries that have violated GATT’s free-trade provisions.

In 2009 the U.S. and several other governments argued that Chinese restrictions on the export of various raw materials (magnesium, coke, bauxite, zinc, etc.) were contrary to GATT’s Article XI, and the WTO agreed.

Then, in July 2012, the U.S., along with Canada, the European Union and Japan, once again challenged Chinese export restrictions—in this case, Chinese restrictions on “rare earth” minerals that are used in the production of cutting-edge products such as smart phones, high-end engines and aerospace systems. The expectation is that, once the WTO appeals process is over, China will again be found to be in violation of GATT rules.

So, today, when it comes the export of natural gas, U.S. policy is at odds with what’s economically sound for the country, contrary to America’s longstanding free-trade commitments, and runs against its larger strategic interests. Quite a trifecta—but a losing bet for sure.



Gary Schmitt co-directs the Marilyn War Center for Security Studies at the American Enterprise Institute. For more, visit aei.org.





headline: For the love of royal baby Prince George
byline: By Cathy Maxwell


“Everyone needs to be valued. Everyone has the potential to give something back.” -- Princess Diana

Hope comes in small bundles.

Babies represent the future whether we are ready for it or not. They reaffirm life. 

Is it any wonder that Britain and the world went wild over the birth of Prince George, third in line to the world’s most famed monarchy? 

His parents are public, charming people and we can identify with their joy over the healthy birth of their son. 

it is true that while the royal baby’s birth is to be cheered, there are far too many children born who are unloved or ignored.  

Yes, the newest George is a cause for celebration. Let us not forget he also carries the genes of his paternal grandmother, the Princess Diana. Her spirit, her empathy and presence helped sweep the monarchy into the modern world.

She raised a son in Prince William who, while understanding the responsibilities of his heritage, is also in touch with his peers. She helped create a legacy that will encourage Prince George to reach out to the world.

And it is true that while the royal baby’s birth is to be cheered, there are far too many children born who are unloved or ignored. They will not have the silver spoon in their mouths or loving families gathered round—and yet, their births are also powerful. Their presence, too, represents hope to a world that is often jaded. 

I do not always understand the whys in life.

I do not know why some are born with so much while others must struggle for basic needs. 

What I do believe is that Princess Diana was right, each of us deserves to be valued. Love is a bountiful commodity. It grows in measure to how much it is shared and every child born is a promise for our future. Perhaps the best way to honor wee George’s birth is to reach out. 

In every community on every continent, there are programs to help children in need, programs designed to help build good, healthy lives. 

Prince George will never worry if he has booties, but in keeping with the spirit of his birth, maybe the best way to celebrate is in making a donation to a charity that helps other babies of his generation. Charities that help adoption and fostering, feeding and educating. Charities to help the world show individuals they are valued. 

If you don’t have a favorite charity for children, check out the descriptions and ratings of charities listed at Charity Navigator.This would be a fitting tribute to a prince from a family who continues to engage the world.

And please, don’t forget, in the section asking if this gift is given in honor of someone special, write His Royal Highness Prince George Alexander Louis of Cambridge. Let’s make his happy birth an incentive to rejoice in all of our children.





headline: Anthony Weiner  Huma Abedin -- What's 'normal' about this relationship?
byline: By Liz Peek


Question on the table: did Anthony Weiner court Huma Abedin via Sext-messages? Sound unlikely?

Why? We know they texted – Anthony says so in a piece published last April in the New York Times Magazine.

He was sending crotch photos to women during the months that Huma and he were dating, during their engagement and even while she gave birth to their son.

We also know he has lewd online relationships with numerous women, and we know of at least one that progressed to professions of love – to the woman known as Ms. Sydney Elaine Leathers, with whom he proposed setting up a pied a terre in Chicago.

At the least, Huma is an enabler of Anthony Weiner’s addiction – addition to attention, to women, to adulation, whatever.

It’s pretty clear he had trouble distinguishing between e-love and the real thing.

Is it so crazy to think that Huma has absurdly stood by her man because she knew of his ghastly behavior, having seen it first hand?

Women across the country are scratching their heads, wondering why any self-respecting female – and especially one who is so attractive and accomplished – would put up with the hideous revelations that Carlos Danger, er Anthony Weiner, has spewed forth.

There are several theories. One, which seems totally plausible, is that Huma is inspired by her mentor and “mother figure” Hillary Clinton, who not only stood up for wayward husband Bill, but has profited handsomely for doing so.

Despite a rocky start, when Hillary blamed a “vast right-wing conspiracy” for having promulgated stories about Bill’s serial infidelities, the former first lady rode a wave of sympathy and her husband’s resurgent popularity to various important way-stations, and is now judged the front-runner to take the White House in 2016. Not bad for a wronged wife.

Hillary is seen by many as insatiable in her political ambition; where would she be if she had walked away from her unfaithful husband? Probably very capably and invisibly managing a left-wind think tank.

Bill’s coattails have proven durable; even President Obama has been known to hop aboard, notwithstanding personal froidure between the two men.

Let’s face it, Hillary made the right choice. She and Bill occasionally bump into one another when their globe-trotting intersects. You couldn’t really call it a close relationship, but who’s counting?

Huma, on the other hand, has not yet revealed any political ambitions of her own. It seems likely that a young woman who worked during college as a White House intern and then attaches herself to the hard-charging Hillary harbors dreams of running for office. 

In which case, clinging to Weiner for political advantage a la Hillary makes sense; still, at the moment, Huma seems focused only on her husband’s political future. Ambitious, though, she surely is; it was, after all, Huma, who did not want Weiner to resign from Congress.

Why anyone would expose herself and her son to the shellacking that was inevitably going to come from her husband’s mayoral candidacy is almost impossible to imagine?

Granted, the baby at 18-months is not yet old enough to be tarred by the ongoing scandal. But he will be one day, and when he Googles mom and dad, he’s unlikely to be impressed.

Did she really think that with more revelations to come that Anthony actually had a shot?

Was it so important to both of them to regain the limelight?

To reappear at the red carpet events that apparently they so missed?

We don’t know, but that she was complicit in the effort to airbrush his past is beyond doubt.

She enthusiastically participated in the soppy stories of his (their) rehabilitation. The P.R. campaign started in the summer of 2012 when the sidelined couple “came out” in a story with People Magazine.

A New York Times Magazine this April was one of the all-time great puff pieces; in between baby talk Anthony laments his fate at the hands of “one fateful tweet”. (A phrase that goes unchallenged by author Jonathan Van Meter.) Weiner also claims “I don’t have this burning, overriding desire to go out and run for office,” which, considering the past few months, is hard to swallow.

In the uncomfortable press conference the two staged a few days ago, Huma won much sympathy by appearing nervous and by admitting as much when she began her prepared remarks.

I don’t buy it.

To Van Meter, Weiner describes Huma this way: “She is the most competent, graceful person I’ve met in all my years in politics. . . . And she’s the hatchet woman! The person at the side of the principal is usually the bad guy.”

Is it likely that the “hatchet woman” is put off by a pesky media mob?

At the least, Huma is an enabler of Anthony Weiner’s addiction – addition to attention, to women, to adulation, whatever.

He’s clearly a sick individual, and her support will allow him to carry on in a make-believe world where sending pictures of one’s genitals to strangers is ok.

In the People interview Huma says “I want people to know we’re a normal family.” She’s wrong -- normal is squabbling over wallpaper colors or why the kids are late for school. There’s nothing normal about this.



Liz Peek is a writer who contributes frequently to FoxNews.com. She is a financial columnist who also writes for The Fiscal Times. For more visit LizPeek.com. Follow her on Twitter@LizPeek.



headline: Liberty and safety -- the debate kicked off by Edward Snowden continues
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


When Edward Snowden revealed that the federal government, in direct defiance of the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution, was unlawfully and unconstitutionally spying on all Americans who use telephones, text messaging or emails to communicate with other persons, he opened a Pandora's box of allegations and recriminations.

The allegations he unleashed are that Americans have a government that assaults our personal freedoms, operates in secrecy and violates the Constitution and the values upon which it is based. The recriminations are that safety is a greater good than liberty, and Snowden interfered with the ability of the government to keep us safe by exposing its secrets, and so he should be silenced and punished.

In the course of this debate, you have heard the argument that we all need to sacrifice some liberty in order to assure our safety, that liberty and safety are in equipoise, and when they clash, it is the government that should balance one against the other and decide which shall prevail. This is, of course, an argument the government loves, as it presupposes that the government has the moral, legal and constitutional power to make this satanic bargain.

It doesn’t.

If somehow freedom and safety do clash, it is the free choice of each person to resolve that clash for himself.

Roman emperors and tribal chieftains, King George III and French revolutionaries, 20th-century dictators and 21st-century American presidents all have asserted that their first job is to keep us safe, and in doing so, they are somehow entitled to take away our liberties, whether it be the speech they hate or fear, the privacy they capriciously love to invade or the private property and wealth they salaciously covet.

This argument is antithetical to the principal value upon which America was founded. That value is simply that individuals -- created in the image and likeness of God and thus possessed of the freedoms that He enjoys and has shared with us -- are the creators of the government.

A sovereign is the source of his own powers. The government is not sovereign. All the freedom that individuals possess, we have received as a gift from God, who is the only true sovereign. All of the powers the government possesses it has received from us, from our personal repositories of freedom.

Thomas Jefferson recognized this when he wrote in the Declaration of Independence that our rights are inalienable -- they cannot be separated from us -- because we have been endowed with them by our Creator.

James Madison, who wrote the Constitution, observed that in the history of the world, when freedom has been won, it happened because those in power begrudgingly permitted freedom as a condition of staying in power or even staying alive.

But not in America.

In America, the opposite occurred when free people voluntarily permitted the government to exercise the limited power needed to protect freedom. That is known as “the consent of the governed.” To Jefferson and Madison, a government lacking that consent is illegitimate.

So, the principal author of the Declaration of Independence and the principal author of the Constitution were of one mind on this: All persons are by nature free, and to preserve those freedoms, they have consented to a government. That was the government they gave us -- not power permitting liberty, but liberty permitting power -- and the instrument of that permission was the Constitution.

The Constitution was created by free men to define and limit the government so it can defend but not threaten our freedoms. Since only free persons can consent to a government, the government cannot lawfully exist without those consents.

Here is where the modern-day tyrants and big-government apologists have succeeded in confusing well-meaning people. They have elevated safety -- which is a goal of government -- to the level of freedom -- which created the government.

This common and pedestrian argument makes the creature -- safety -- equal its creator -- freedom. That is a metaphysical impossibility because it presumes that the good to be purchased is somehow equal to the free choices of the purchaser.

What does this mean?

It means that when politicians say that liberty and safety need to be balanced against each other, they are philosophically, historically and constitutionally wrong. Liberty is the default position. Liberty is the essence of our natural state. Liberty cannot possibly be equal to a good we have instructed the government to obtain.

What is the only moral relationship between liberty and safety?

It cannot be balance, because liberty and safety are not equals, as one created the other. It can only be bias -- a continual predisposition toward and preference for freedom.

Every conceivable clash between the free choices of persons and their instructions to their government to safeguard freedom must favor the free choices because freedom is inalienable.

Just as I cannot authorize the government to take away your freedom any more than you can authorize it to take away mine, a majority of all but one cannot authorize the government in a free society to take freedom from that one individual. So if somehow freedom and safety do clash, it is the free choice of each person to resolve that clash for himself, and not one the government can morally make.

The government will always make choices that favor its power because, as Ludwig von Mises reminded us, government is essentially the negation of freedom. If anyone truly believes that by silencing him or monitoring him or taxing him the government keeps him safe, and that those are the least restrictive means by which to do so, let that person surrender his own speech and privacy and wealth. The rest of us will retain ours and provide for our own safety.

The reasons we have consented to limited government are to preserve the freedom to pursue happiness, the freedom to be different and the freedom to be left alone. None of these freedoms can exist if we are subservient to the government in the name of safety or anything else.





headline: Obama's economics speech isn't about jobs, it's about politics
byline: By Peter Morici


President Obama is on the campaign trail to sell his economic program directly to voters—over the head of a reluctant congress. He says it’s all about jobs but it’s just politics as usual.

The economic recovery has been painfully slow. Through last fall, growth was only 2.1 percent and has since slowed to about half that pace.

Concerned about the durability of the expansion and pending ObamaCare mandate to fund heath insurance for full-time employees, businesses are replacing full-time workers with part-timers. Since January, 833,000 additional Americans have reported working part-time, while 97,000 fewer say they have full time positions.

No one ever created a job by raising the cost of hiring workers.

The president wants more infrastructure spending, publically-funded pre-kindergarten education and a higher minimum wage. However, those will not substantially change the unemployment picture.

Improvements to roads and other public facilities are sorely needed but too many federal dollars are spent on materials from China, which often excludes U.S. products from its projects. The United States would be within its WTO rights to keep more of that money at home, but Obama refuses.

Whatever the benefits, funding pre-K with higher taxes only steals jobs from other industries, or requires more borrowing. And no one ever created a job by raising the cost of hiring workers.

Inadequate demand for what Americans make remains the primary drag on growth. Consumers are spending again and housing prices are recovering, but since the recovery began, imports and the trade deficit have zoomed.

China, Japan and Germany—the three largest economies after the United States—pursue cheap currencies and other protectionist strategies to amass trade surpluses with the United States, and prop up employment at the expense of American workers.

Along with imported oil, the $540 billion trade gap costs Americans about 8 million jobs—enough jobs to drive unemployment down to five percent.

Economists across the political spectrum have offered approaches for addressing mercantilism but Obama remains dismissive.

Lifting restrictions on petroleum development off shore and in Alaska, more intense use of natural gas in freight transportation, and accelerating the adoption of hybrids and more fuel efficient internal combustion vehicles would erase dependence on imported oil.

The president has another agenda.

Along with immigration reform, championing spending for infrastructure, pre-K and a higher minimum wage shores up support for Democrats among Hispanics, women and unions for the 2014 elections. However, all would require more government borrowing. For example, every time the minimum wage goes up, fewer people work and pay taxes.

Our federal system permits states to experiment with new approaches, and it seems the president is embracing strategies—government borrowing to win elections—that made the finances of California and Illinois so fragile, and put Detroit—once the nation’s fourth largest city—into bankruptcy.

If growth continues at 1, 2 or even 3 percent, then the weight of the baby boom retiring on federal entitlements will push federal deficits through the ceiling in the next decade.

Higher taxes won’t help much. If tax rates are too high, successful people work less and take their skills elsewhere. Technology companies and financial institutions—where the real fortunes are made these days—can park their patents and profits in Ireland or some other low-tax jurisdiction.

Sooner or later, Washington won’t be able to continue borrowing. Just as unions and banks will now tussle over whether pensioners or bondholders should have first claim on Detroit’s remaining revenues, Washington can dicker with Beijing over whether the social security checks should go out or the Middle Kingdom gets all the interest due on its holdings of U.S. bonds.

At that point, we can auction off the Grand Canyon and spend the Fourth of July remembering what a great civilization we spent away.





headline: My George Zimmerman moment
byline: By Wayne Allyn Root


President Obama can’t stop comparing himself, or the son he never had, to Trayvon Martin. And he can’t stop talking about race. Everything in Obama’s world is black and white. This is not America’s first “post racial-president.” This is America’s first “all race, all the time president.”

I see the Zimmerman/Trayvon Martin case very differently. For me it was never about black or white. It was always about life or death -- for George Zimmerman. You see, thirty-six years ago I was George Zimmerman. Thirty-six years ago I almost died in a life or death struggle eerily similar to George Zimmerman’s confrontation. Let me tell you the story.

In 1977, at the age of 15, I attended Mt Vernon High School in Mt. Vernon, New York, one of the most dangerous and violent urban schools in America. Guns and knives were rampant. Assaults were a daily occurrence.

If I had had a gun, I certainly would have used it to save my life. That was the choice George Zimmerman faced.

Every walk through the hallway was an opportunity to be beaten or robbed. Lunchtime was an opportunity to have your lunch extorted by someone threatening your life. And worst of all were the bathrooms.

Every decent kid at Mt. Vernon High School knew we were taking our lives in our hands if we went to the bathroom- so we didn’t. We learned to hold it in all day until we got home- for fear of being robbed or beaten in the filthy, dangerous bathrooms where hoods, gang members, and drug dealers hung out.

The school was about 85% black. I was white. But being white wasn’t the problem. Being a good kid was the problem. It wasn’t black vs. white. It was good vs. bad. The good black kids were as readily beaten up and intimidated as the good white kids.

Like George Zimmerman I decided I wanted to make a difference -- for white and black kids. I was sick of the crime and violence.

I spent the summer lifting weights and taking boxing lessons, bulked up, and upon my return to school, volunteered to become a Marshal. That meant I was part of our volunteer school police force. We were unarmed, but carried badges and walkie talkies. Our job was to police the halls and prevent crime, drug dealing, and cutting classes.

Like Zimmerman, we weren't supposed to engage, only observe and call for help. But, as you might surmise, it doesn't always work out that way.

In the late spring of 1977 I faced a "George Zimmerman moment.” As I patrolled an empty hallway in my high school, I spotted a gang-banger smoking and listening to loud music when he was supposed to be in class.

I confronted and told him, “You’re coming with me.” The kid wheeled around and pulled a gigantic knife. In court it was classified as a machete (with a blade longer than 8 ½ inches).

He lunged at me and I grabbed his wrist. We wrestled to the ground with him on top. A much bigger kid than me, he was soon winning the struggle and about to stick the machete into my head. 

If I had had a gun, I certainly would have used it to save my life. That was the choice George Zimmerman faced. What Obama and the race-baiters call murder is self-defense. Those who make the race baiters happy by not fighting back are...dead. After the fact, they’re called “victims.”

I got lucky. As my life was about to be extinguished a principal emerged from his office to check on the commotion. 

Like Zimmerman, I’m sure no one knew which of us was screaming in my life or death struggle, but my screams saved my life. The principal shouted, “Hey you, drop that knife.”

The kid ran. The principal raced to my side…I told him what happened…together we chased down my assailant in the school courtyard. I lived to tell this story.

Zimmerman’s critics call him “a police wanna-be.” I guess you could say I was a “police wanna-be” too. How rude.

You know what that means? Zimmerman and I cared about our community. I cared about my fellow classmates. He cared about his fellow homeowners.

We both cared about right and wrong. We wanted to protect and serve. We wanted to make a difference. And we volunteered to put our lives on the line -- for no pay.

Should someone like that be punished, vilified, and put in prison, or respected, celebrated, and recognized by society?

I believe at the least, that person deserves the benefit of the doubt. I cheer a person who volunteers to protect his school or neighborhood. If only more Americans were willing to police our streets and schools, we’d all be safer. We should be thanking the George Zimmermans of this world.

You know the biggest irony? Obama is the ultimate “community organizer” and fan of volunteerism. Obama thinks if you volunteer to protest in front of banks to force minority loans, or fight for welfare and food stamps, you’re a community hero. But if you lay your life on the line to protect your community from criminals, you deserve prison for defending your life. Interesting interpretation.

God forbid you ever find yourself in a life or death situation, and survive by hurting or killing the bad guy. If the Al Sharpton’s and Jesse Jackson’s have their way, you’ll end up in jail.

Unfortunately our president can now be added to the list of people out to vilify you for trying to clean up your community and help your fellow man, white or black. Always remember that George Zimmerman was protecting a large number of black homeowners in that community.

Obama fantasizes that he could have been Trayvon Martin. But thirty-six years ago, I really was George Zimmerman.



Wayne Allyn Root is capitalist evangelist, entrepreneur, and Libertarian-conservative Republican. He is a former Libertarian vice presidential nominee. Wayne's latest book is "The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide: Secrets to Protecting Your Family, Your Finances, and Your Freedom." For more, visit his website: www.ROOTforAmerica.com. Follow him on Twitter@WayneRoot.



headline: America, it's not too late to stop ObamaCare
byline: By Sen. Marco Rubio


Too often, politicians forget how their decisions impact real people. They dig in to protect their political agenda at all costs, even if it hurts the very people they were elected to serve. And when that happens, no one gets hurt as much as working class Americans.

Business interests and labor unions can afford to hire lobbyists to look out for them. But most workers and small business owners are counting on the men and women they elected to be their eyes, ears and voices.

If we are to truly speak for them, we should take their opinions into account when deciding whether to move forward on the most important issues before us: the implementation of ObamaCare.

With each passing day, we see mounting evidence of how ObamaCare creates more problems than it solves.

In 2010, Congress passed ObamaCare on a divisive, partisan vote. Its supporters claimed it would solve our health care problems. But with each passing day, we see mounting evidence of how ObamaCare creates more problems than it solves, particularly for small business owners and the people who work for them.

For example, when I visited Land O' Lakes, Florida in 2010, I met restaurant owner Ben Pumo. I stood in his kitchen at Benedetto's Ristorante Italiano and listened to him explain how ObamaCare would impact his business and employees he had come to see "as part of his family."

He explained how it would impose new costs on his business, how it would be a blow to his freedom to hire workers as he pleased without triggering new taxes, and how he feared the worst was still yet to come.

Today, Benedetto’s employs fewer than their earlier peak of 56 employees before the Great Recession.Like every business owner in America, he’s working hard every single day to get back to where he once was – and then surpass that. But people like Mr. Pumo, who are trying to grow their businesses, are discouraged by ObamaCare.

Once a business reaches 50 full-time employees, the ObamaCare tax will kick in. At that point, businesses will have to pay for their employees’ health coverage or they will have to pay a $2,000 tax penalty for each full-time employee after the first thirty. But because there are no penalties if part-time employees are not offered coverage, ObamaCare basically encourages small businesses to hire people part-time instead of full-time. That is one reason why last month, 322,000 Americans were forced into part-time work.

If you are a small business with about 47, 48 or 49 employees and you want to hire more people, ObamaCare encourages you to hold back on hiring new workers or cut the hours of existing ones so that you don’t reach 50 employees. That is why 75% of small businesses now say they are going to be forced to either fire workers or cut their hours.

I live just a few blocks away from the real world impact of ObamaCare. Miami’s famed “Calle Ocho” is lined with small grocery stores, bakeries, restaurants, beauty salons and small auto shops, among many other small businesses. Most of them are run by immigrants chasing the American dream.

Many of them are too small to trigger the employer mandate, but their owners and their workers still have to deal with the individual mandate, which forces people to buy insurance on expensive state level exchanges.

Because of ObamaCare, many of them will now have a new expense and it could be enough to put them out of business or force a downsizing. Instead of forcing people into expensive exchanges, we should adopt market-based reforms that will provide Americans with more health care options at more affordable rates.

We still have time to do something about this.

This September, Congress will have to pass another short term spending bill to fund the federal government. We should pass one that keeps the government open, but doesn't waste any more money on ObamaCare.

The president and his allies – and even some Republicans – will accuse us of threatening to shut down the government. In fact, it is President Obama who insists on shutting down the government unless it funds his failed ObamaCare experiment.

He will say that we are refighting old battles and that it is time to move on. ObamaCare might be old news in Washington, but for millions of middle class Americans, it is just beginning.

Instead of giving more speeches, I wish the president would listen more. He should listen to the people who took every penny they had saved and started their own businesses. They will tell him that ObamaCare could force them to lay people off and maybe even close their doors.

He should listen to the young couple that already has insurance and are happy with it and their doctor. They will tell him that ObamaCare just cost them that insurance they were happy with and the doctor that they loved.

He should listen to full time workers who barely get by working 40 hours a week. They will tell him that ObamaCare just forced them to work part-time.

It is time to admit that ObamaCare isn't going to work, decide not to waste a single cent more on it, and replace it with market-based reforms that will give people more health insurance choices and options.

It's still not too late. This September may be our last best chance to do anything about this disastrous law.





headline: Why is Obama AWOL on Gillibrand's bill to curb military sexual assault?
byline: By Lanny Davis


Some things that happen in Washington, D.C., have come to be expected, such as hyper-partisanship in the Congress along sharp "red" vs. "blue" lines.

New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand (D) has assembled a remarkable bipartisan coalition of senators to support her modest proposal, the Military Justice Improvement Act, which would guarantee that decisions whether to investigate and prosecute allegations of unwelcome sexual contact within the military would be made outside of the chain of command where the alleged assault occurred.

Currently, such decisions are made by the superior officers in the chain of command directly above the alleged victim.

Maybe, just maybe, Obama can make this moment a precedent for more purple moments in Congress in the remainder of his term.

The senator’s proposal has received notable bipartisan and diverse ideological support. When is the last time you saw a list of supporters that included conservative Republican Sens. Ted Cruz (Texas), Rand Paul (Ky.), and David Vitter (La.) on the same side of an issue as well-known progressive Sens. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), Al Franken (D-Minn.), Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.) and Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.)?

One reason for this breadth of support is Gillibrand's skillfully crafted moderate and modest approach to the proposed reform.

For example, the proposal does not assign to a civilian authority such decisions to investigate or prosecute. Rather it would retain these decisions within the Judge Advocate General (JAG) office to be made by an experienced attorney not in the immediate chain of command above the complainant.

Note also, the definition of the "unwanted sexual contact" complaints to be affected by the senator's proposal is limited to intentional unwelcome conduct. That means intent must be proved; force against the individual's will must be proved; and contact must be proved, i.e., obnoxious, harassing, or even abusive words or gestures are not subject to this proposal.

Note also that the proposal also takes into account the needs of commanding officers by excluding 37 serious crimes unique to the military, such as going AWOL, as well as all misdemeanor type crimes, so it is not an all-or-nothing approach.

There is more than enough data to support the common-sense assumption that those who are victims of military sexual assault may be discouraged to report an incident, knowing that only those immediately above them in their chain of command will decide whether to investigate or prosecute.

For example, according to the Pentagon's own data, of the active duty women who indicated experiencing unwelcome sexual conduct, 66 percent said they felt uncomfortable making a report within their chain of command and 47 percent indicated fear of retaliation or reprisal.

Even the top military leadership doesn't attempt to deny the obvious. The Commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. James Amos, stated this year that victims do not come forward because "they don't trust the chain of command."

So how is it possible that President Obama allowed his Defense Secretary, Chuck Hagel, to oppose the legislation in testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee?

This is one of those instances where, try as I might, I just can't understand the opposition's reasoning.

Six-term Michigan Democratic Sen. Carl Levin, whom I have known and admired for more than three decades (he was first elected in 1978), believes his alternative proposal approved by the committee — which requires automatic reviews of a commander's decision not to prosecute — was a reasonable compromise.

But, with all due respect, that to me doesn't address the reality of the perception by potential sexual assault victims of a conflict of interest or possible retaliation. The Joint Chiefs’ reason for opposition, that the proposal "undermines good order and discipline," is conclusory and, respectfully, as far as I can tell, not based on facts.

So I hope Obama decides to support this amendment when it comes to the Senate floor. There are already 42 senators ready to support it, with another nine votes very possible, given the moderation of the proposal.

After all, this purple moment when Paul and Sanders agree on something doesn't happen very often. Obama should be ready to lead and support Gillibrand’s proposal, especially when the need for a perceived independent process for protecting victims of sexual assault seems so obvious and the downside so unclear.

Maybe, just maybe, Obama can make this moment a precedent for more purple moments in Congress in the remainder of his term. Goodness knows "this town" needs them.





headline: Detroit's mess -- why the future stalled in the Motor City
byline: By John Stossel


MSNBC host Melissa Harris-Perry -- the same TV commentator who said Americans need to stop raising kids as if they belong to individual families -- had an extraordinary explanation for why the city of Detroit sought to declare bankruptcy last week: not enough government.

“This is what it looks like when government is small enough to drown in your bathtub, and it is not a pretty picture.” She says budget-cutting Republicans threaten to transform all of the U.S. into Detroit.

What? Detroit has been a “model city” for big-government!

All Detroit’s mayors since 1962 were Democrats who were eager to micromanage. And spend. Detroit has the only utility tax in Michigan, and its income tax is the third-highest of any big city in America (only Philadelphia and Louisville take more, and they aren’t doing great, either).

Detroit’s automakers got billions in federal bailouts. 

Politicians can’t make mismanaged industries, constant government meddling, welfare and bureaucratic labor union rules (Detroit has 47 unions) into a formula for success.  

The Detroit News revealed that Detroit in 2011 had around twice as many municipal employees per capita as cities with comparable populations. The city water and sewer department employed a “horseshoer” even though it keeps no horses.

This is “small enough government”? Harris-Perry must have one heck of a bathtub.

Politicians think they know best, but they can’t alter the laws of economics. They can’t make mismanaged industries, constant government meddling, welfare and bureaucratic labor union rules (Detroit has 47 unions) into a formula for success. 

County Judge Rosemarie Aquilina wants to stop the bankruptcy process on the grounds that state law forbids Detroit to cut government services. But how will Detroit pay for the services? Unsustainable public-sector pensions, a bloated workforce -- it’s all supposed to continue somehow.

Politicians on Detroit’s city council aren’t even willing to sell off vacant lots that the city owns, or even a portion of the billions of dollars in art in its government-subsidized museum (including the original “Howdy Doody” puppet).

On my TV show, I confronted the council’s second in command about his refusal to let Detroit sell land. He says he voted against it “because the developer wants to grow trees. We don't need any more new trees in our city.” The politicians micromanaged themselves into bankruptcy, and they want to keep digging.

A member of the British Parliament writes that Detroit is like the fictional city of Starnesville in Ayn Rand’s 1957 novel “Atlas Shrugged” -- a car-manufacturing city that became a ghost town after experimenting with socialism. In the novel, Starnesville’s demise is the first sign that the entire society is approaching collapse.

Detroit is already there. 911 calls sometimes go unanswered. Two-thirds of the population left town.

As usual, the politicians want to try more of the same. They constantly come up with plans, but the plans are always big, simple-minded ones that run roughshod over the thousands of little plans made by ordinary citizens. Politicians want new stadiums, new transportation schemes, housing projects.

Andrew Rodney, a documentary filmmaker from Detroit, says many bad, big-government ideas that have plagued the U.S. were tried out first in Detroit. “It’s the first city to experience a lot of the planning that went into a lot of cities.”

Home loan subsidies, public housing, stadium subsidies, a $350 million project called “Renaissance Center” (the city ended up selling it for just $50 million), an automated People Mover system that not many people feel moved to use (it moves people in only one direction), endless favors to unions -- if a government idea has failed anywhere in America, there’s a good chance it failed in Detroit first.

And if you criticized them for it, politicians like former Mayor Coleman Young called you a racist. “To attack Detroit is to attack black,” Young said. That tends to shut critics up.

But the laws of economics apply to us all.

Insulated from serious criticism, insulated from economic reality, Detroit thought somehow it’d muddle through -- until now. There is a big lesson, if people elsewhere are willing to learn before it’s too late.





headline: Eric Holder, our contemptuous attorney general, must resign
byline: By John Yoo, Robert J. Delahunty


Attorney General Eric Holder – the first and only sitting Cabinet member in 225 years to be cited for contempt of Congress – has politicized the United States Department of Justice to the breaking point. 

Shortly after a Florida jury found George Zimmerman innocent of murder on Saturday night, Holder announced that DOJ would conduct a criminal civil rights investigation. 

The FBI had previously conducted a lengthy investigation that found no evidence that Trayvon Martin’s death stemmed from racial motives.

We must judge Holder’s decision to prolong the Zimmerman investigation against this backdrop of five years of politicized law enforcement.

Disregarding the Florida jury and the FBI, Holder is prolonging a deeply unjust and unwarranted investigation in response to demands from Rev. Al Sharpton and his ilk.

Holder has no legal grounds on which to stand. The federal government’s limited constitutional powers do not extend to commonplace murders, whose prosecution is the job of the states. 

The Constitution’s Reconstruction Amendments primarily target state officials, not private individuals, for depriving others of their federal rights. Zimmerman was not acting under “color of law” -- indeed, the state of Florida has just tried to prosecute him.

Holder may envisage prosecuting Zimmerman under laws prohibiting private conspiracies to deprive people of their federal rights. But that approach would pose serious constitutional problems.

Martin’s killing, however tragic, is purely intra-state, by one private individual against another. There is no broad conspiracy to frustrate federal law, perhaps in silent cooperation with state authorities, as happened in days gone by with the Ku Klux Klan. 

The prosecution’s own witnesses admitted at trial that Zimmerman had not acted out of racial bias. The FBI’s findings confirmed that. Even under federal hate crime law, which itself may be unconstitutional, a federal prosecution would be unsuccessful without proof of racial motive. 

Holder’s decision is the most recent example of his practice of abusing prosecutorial discretion, misinterpreting the law, and deploying criminal justice for political ends. 

An Attorney’s General’s powers to launch a criminal investigation and prosecution are awesome. A defendant faces the risk of years of jail time and indelible disgrace. Legal fees can be astronomical. Even if a case does not go to trial, a criminal investigation in itself imposes enormous legal, psychological, and financial burdens.

Yet the decision to pit the personnel and resources of the Department of Justice against a single individual is essentially committed to the Attorney General alone. Those vast powers must be exercised with the utmost care and impartiality. Holder has repeatedly failed to meet that standard. Indeed, his record in office shows the opposite.

Holder’s prosecutorial practices evidence a pattern of leniency towards high-ranking corporate officers in a position to make substantial campaign contributions or with close ties to the Democratic Party. 

Consider that in the five years since the beginning of the nation’s financial crisis in 2008. Holder’s Justice Department has brought no high-ranking executives or managers in the financial sector to trial for criminal conduct. 

This is despite the fact that millions of Americans lost their homes, and investors incurred hundred of billions of dollars in losses, because of alleged high-level wrongdoing by banks and lenders. 

In one financial scandal, Holder’s Justice Department dropped criminal charges against Jon Corzine, a wealthy financial speculator who had been Democrat Senator and then Governor of New Jersey and the CEO of the bankrupt brokerage firm MF Global. 

Corzine was accused of stealing $1 billion in customer funds that had supposedly been placed in “segregated” accounts in his firm. We are asked to believe that Corzine’s Democratic Party connections – which included Wall Street fundraising for President Obama - had nothing to do with Holder’s decision not to prosecute him. 

Holder’s Department also decided not to try criminal charges against the high ranking executives apparently responsible for the devastating BP oil spill.Instead, the Department settled its case in 2012 by accepting a guilty plea and a fine from the corporation itself, rather than from those who ran it. The Department brought criminal charges against a low-level BP executive and two rig supervisors. Even Robert Reich, who served in President Bill Clinton’s Cabinet, objected that Holder had let the “real criminals” get away. 

When it comes to the administration’s media adversaries, however, Holder’s Department has gone from passive to aggressive. On the basis of a false affidavit, it obtained a warrant to spy on James Rosen, a respected Fox News reporter. 

To catch another leaker, the Justice Department violated its own regulations and went on a fishing expedition through the communications of the Associated Press’s editors and reporters. 

The constitutional rights that the Obama administration claims to worry so much about in the Zimmerman-Martin case did not seem to give DOJ a minute’s pause when the First Amendment right to a free press was involved.

Professional standards were also cast aside in favor of political demands by Holder’s decision to pursue CIA agents who had interrogated suspected terrorists overseas. 

Then, as now with Zimmerman, Holder disingenuously claimed merely to be following “the facts and the law.” Holder ignored the fact, however, that seasoned, professional federal prosecutors had already examined charges of CIA misconduct, carried out an investigation, and concluded that there was no basis for a prosecution.

Holder’s skewed enforcement of the criminal laws mirrors the Obama administration’s general disdain for the rule of law. 

This is an administration that has relentlessly subordinated law to politics. The administration’s recent decision to delay the Affordable Care Act’s employer health insurance mandate is a clear example.

The postponement seems dictated by mere political opportunism to avoid the negative consequences of a costly law during a midterm election year. 

Last year’s refusal to enforce the immigration law against 800,000 or more illegal aliens, on the ground that President Obama disagreed with the law’s policy, violated the president’s constitutional duty to “take care that the laws are faithfully executed.” 

The National Labor Relations Board willfully defies decisions from two federal appeals courts that President Obama’s recess appointments are illegal and the Board cannot sit. 

In 2009, the administration decided not to enforce federal drug control laws in states that permit marijuana for medical purposes.

Further, the administration’s armed intervention in Libya was a plain violation of the War Powers Resolution, which a Democratically-controlled Congress had passed over President Richard Nixon’s veto. 

In this one case, presidents have the right to refuse to enforce a law: when Congress has attempted to intrude on the power of another branch, such as the executive’s commander-in-chief authority. But President Obama does not believe the War Powers Act is unconstitutional – yet he violated that law anyway. 

We must judge Holder’s decision to prolong the Zimmerman investigation against this backdrop of five years of politicized law enforcement.

Holder has already done more than enough damage to public confidence in the fairness and integrity of law enforcement. He seems intent on inflaming and embittering race relations throughout the nation, which he already tried once in 2009 by calling America a nation of “cowards” on race, and is attempting again, now. 

As former officials in the Justice Department, it gives us no pleasure in reaching this conclusion, but Holder can finally do the nation his greatest service by simply leaving office.



John Yoo, is a law professor at the University of California at Berkeley. He served as an official in the Bush Justice Department from 2001-03 and is author most recently of "Taming Globalization: International Law, the U.S. Constitution, and the New World Order" (Oxford 2013).





headline: Will IRS scandal lead all the way to Obama?
byline: By Jay Sekulow


It took a mere two months and eight days for the Obama administration’s spin on the growing scandal of the IRS targeting Tea Party and conservative groups to completely collapse.

Let’s rewind to May 10, 2013, when Lois Lerner, the former Director of the IRS Exempt Organizations Division, apologized on behalf of the agency for the targeting scheme that placed additional scrutiny on those tax exemption applications. When she did, she made several key claims.

According to Lerner’s account, “line people” in Cincinnati decided on their own to target Tea Party groups and to send them inappropriate and intrusive questions. When senior IRS officials found out, they imposed rationality on the process and stopped the abuses.

From the beginning we knew the IRS’s public story was false. 

This week, on July 18, the IRS’s own employees demonstrated that this story was utterly, completely false.

For the first time, congressional investigators heard not just from one of those very “line people” blamed for the scandal but also from a senior IRS attorney in Washington who was directly involved in the process at the very highest levels.

And, for the first time, congressional investigators heard candor and truth.

Did the IRS scandal originate with “line people”? No. In fact, Elizabeth Hofacre, the Ohio agent charged with processing Tea Party applications, was so frustrated with IRS actions that she asked for – and received – a transfer from her original position to escape from IRS dictates that came from Washington, D.C.

Even worse, we now know – thanks to Carter Hull – a retired Washington tax specialist who was responsible for providing guidance on reviewing tax-exempt applications for Tea Party groups – that the scandal goes all the way to the IRS chief counsel’s office. In fact, it was the chief counsel’s office – not the “line people” that redoubled efforts to scrutinize conservatives. Here’s a key portion of Mr. Hull’s testimony:

"In August 2011 I attended a meeting at which the applications assigned to me were discussed. I recall that Don Spellman, David Marshall, and Amy Franklin from Chief Counsel’s office were at the meeting... I recall that Ms. Franklin or someone else from Chief Counsel’s office stated that more current information was needed for my applications and that a second development letter should be sent to the applicants. I also recall the discussion about the creation of a template development letter for Tea Party applications."

This is extraordinary, suggesting that it was the IRS chief counsel’s office, not rogue agents in Ohio, who engineered the key abuses in the targeting scandal, including the extraordinarily-intrusive questionnaires that asked conservative groups for donor lists, Internet login information, social media pages, and even the political and charitable activities of family members.

Hull went on to testify that he had not seen anything like that in almost 50 years of work at the IRS.

To be clear, IRS Chief Counsel William Wilkins is a political appointee, appointed by President Obama in 2009 – the top lawyer in the agency. The involvement of his office – as early as 2011 – represents a dramatic escalation of the IRS scandal.

The previous IRS explanation – a bureaucratic mistake, originating in Ohio – was bad enough. This explanation is much worse. With the involvement of the IRS’s top legal office more than two years ago, the questions now become eerily reminiscent of earlier Washington scandals.

What was discussed at the more 100 meetings between the IRS Commissioner and White House meetings?

Why was President Obama’s political operative, Stephanie Cutter, included in meetings with the IRS?

In other words, what did the White House know, and when did it know it?

I am the lead lawyer in the ACLJ’s lawsuit against the IRS on behalf of 41 conservative groups in 22 states. From the beginning we knew the IRS’s public story was false. We have documents showing the abuse stretched from coast-to-coast and originated from IRS offices from coast-to-coast.

From my own experience as an IRS tax trial attorney, I knew that abuse so widespread could not possibly be originated or sustained from just a few “line people.”

Now the evidence is in, and the scandal is moving up from Cincinnati and deep into the ranks of key Obama administration officials.

How high will it go?Could this end up at the Oval Office? The evidence will tell the tale.





headline: We all must hear Malala Yousafzai's brave voice
byline: By Cal Thomas


BELFAST, Northern Ireland While American cable TV news engaged in saturation coverage of the closing arguments and verdict in the George Zimmerman murder trial, the BBC and Sky News carried an inspiring speech by Malala Yousafzai, the 16-year-old Pakistani girl shot in the head last October by the Taliban for advocating the education of girls.

On her birthday, Malala addressed in barely accented English a special youth gathering at the United Nations in New York. She wore a shawl that had belonged to the late Pakistani President Benazir Bhutto, who was assassinated by Islamic extremists in 2007.

Only occasionally referring to notes, Malala, who now lives in Birmingham, England, where she received medical treatment following the attack, delivered a speech more compelling than those given by most diplomats and presidents who have spoken at the UN. "Thousands of people have been killed by the terrorists and millions have been injured," she noted, "I am just one of them." She said her injury and the killing and wounding of her friends had launched "thousands of voices."

Malala's voice needs to be multiplied by thousands, even millions if the Taliban and their terrorist brothers are to be isolated and defeated.

Sounding more mature than her years, Malala said, "The terrorists thought that they would change our aims and stop our ambitions but nothing changed in my life except this: Weakness, fear and hopelessness died. Strength, power and courage was born."

Invoking the nonviolent teachings of Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., Mahatma Gandhi, Jesus, Buddha, Mother Teresa and Nelson Mandela, Malala said she is not against anyone, rather she is for education for girls and boys, especially the children of the Taliban. She said, "I do not even hate the Talib who shot me. Even if there is a gun in my hand and he stands in front of me, I would not shoot him."

In a powerful indictment of extremism, Malala said, "The extremists are afraid of books and pens. The power of education frightens them. They are afraid of women. The power of the voice of women frightens them."

She accused terrorists of "misusing the name of Islam and Pashtun society for their own personal benefits." While her claim "Islam is a religion of peace" is debatable, given how it is often practiced by many radicals who assert they are the true disciples of Mohammed, Malala's voice needs to be multiplied by thousands, even millions if the Taliban and their terrorist brothers are to be isolated and defeated. The voices (and most importantly behavior) must come from within Islam, not outside of it.

Here are three recent examples of what Malala and her applauding UN audience face. Last week, Islamic extremists kidnapped and murdered a Coptic Christian in Egypt as part of a protest against the military coup that ousted President Mohammed Morsi. It is the latest example of the growing persecution against Egyptian Christians.

The Middle East Media Research Institute reported that in a Friday sermon in Damascus, a Syrian preacher blamed Jews for the civil unrest throughout the Middle East.

In London, a funeral was held last week for Lee Rigby, a British soldier stabbed to death in May by a pair of alleged Islamic fanatics.

Malala, though courageous, faces a seemingly impossible task, but if one person can spark a revolution, perhaps one can spark a counter revolution with words like these: "Let us wage a global struggle against illiteracy, poverty and terrorism and let us pick up our books and pens. They are our most powerful weapons. One child, one teacher, one pen and one book can change the world."

Good luck, brave heart.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Finally, EU makes Hezbollah pays for terror in Europe
byline: By Daniel Schwammenthal


"We are all Hezbollah now," London demonstrators chanted in 2006 as the Lebanese group rained missiles on Israeli civilians. The European Union decision to designate Hezbollah's military arm a terrorist organization won't cure the minds of such "anti-war" protestors, let alone end Hezbollah's crimes. But at least it will shine some much-needed sunlight on the terrorists and their sympathizers.

As Lithuanian Foreign Minister Linas Antanas Linkevicius, who chaired Monday’s meeting of EU foreign ministers, said: “We should name names because time comes to tell the truth." Actually, the time to do so had come long before.

Over a year ago, on July 18, 2012, Hezbollah blew up a bus in Burgas, Bulgaria, murdering five Israeli tourists and the Bulgarian driver.

Just 11 days earlier, police foiled a similar attack in Cyprus, for which a Cypriot court convicted a Lebanese-born Swedish citizen and Hezbollah member.

Hezbollah terror attacks in Europe, in fact, date back to the 1980s, when the group murdered Iranian dissidents in Germany and U.S. soldiers in Spain.

The EU's terror designation can help further weaken Hezbollah politically and erode its public support.

Hezbollah may have, at least until last year, refrained from further terror attacks in Europe. But it never stopped using Europe as staging ground.

Hezbollah has built an extensive European network, with 950 identified members and supporters in Germany alone. It uses the continent for fundraising, money laundering and recruitment. And as the Cypriot conviction of a Swedish-Lebanese dual national demonstrates, Hezbollah takes advantage of the ease of travel European passports provide.

And yet, the EU resisted listing Hezbollah for too long. Some member states were concerned about the safety of their U.N. troops stationed in Lebanon. Others argued, not very convincingly, that there wasn’t enough evidence.

The main argument against listing, however, was that Hezbollah is also involved in social and political activities. The group is part of the Lebanese government and the EU didn’t want to cut off its access to Beirut. That Hezbollah practices politics not exactly in Jeffersonian style was conveniently overlooked.

In 2005, for example, Prime Minister Rafik Harriri and 21 others were killed in a bomb explosion for which a U.N.-backed tribunal indicted four Hezbollah members. Hezbollah's tactics of coalition "negotiations" included a bloody takeover of Beirut in 2008. And Hezbollah uses its ill-gained political influence to advance radical Shia ideology that is deeply anti-Western and anti-Semitic.

But it was the recent Hezbollah attacks on European soil, combined with its murderous support for Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad's slaughter of his own people, which finally helped swing the debate toward listing.

However, to facilitate continued contacts with all political parties—i.e. Hezbollah’s political wing—the EU drew an artificial distinction between “military” and “political” arms, listing only the former, robbing the designation of its full potential.

An EU blacklisting of the entire organization would allow police to seize the terror group's assets and stop fundraising and recruitment. As it now stands, however, European authorities will have to prove that the activities directly benefit the "military" arm -- no easy task.

Nevertheless, the designation should give European counter-terrorism forces greater leeway for cross-border cooperation to investigate Hezbollah and hopefully prevent the next attack.

The designation's other main effect is political and shouldn’t be discounted. Because Hezbollah does dabble in politics, however violently, it needs legitimacy, or at least the veneer of it. Its survival depends on public support from the Shia community, where Hezbollah's image has already suffered due to the group's controversial support for Syrian President Assad.

The EU's terror designation can therefore help further weaken Hezbollah politically and erode its public support. Europe has finally demonstrated some resolve, however belated and qualified, sending a message of a more united West against terror.

Hezbollah must have thought it had found the perfect crime: hiding behind civilians to escape military retaliation and hiding behind its political “work” to protect itself from any diplomatic fallout. That game is now up.





headline: Why immigration reform will be won or lost in August
byline: By Mark Kennedy


House Speaker John Boehner believes that the House will pass immigration legislation at some point in early fall, but in order to get to that point the desire for reform must survive its most perilous test to date: the August recess.

The pivotal battle on this issue will not take place in Washington itself, but in a select number of House districts all across the United States. Supporters of reform must have troops with an authentically targeted message on every front line.

With House members back in their home districts for a month, opponents have ample opportunities to assemble constituents, an elected official’s closest advisers, against a plan.

Supporters of immigration reform are on the path to victory, but in order to cross the finish line they must have a plan to win August and the courage to stick to it.

A transformational issue (health care) during the 2009 August recess gave birth to the Tea Party movement, which grew into a force strong enough to allow the GOP to take control of the House of Representatives in 2010. Given the passions on both sides of the immigration issue, some lawmakers are wary of a repeat.

Proponents of reform should work to counter that energy with an enthusiasm that matches opponents and is authentically targeted to each individual district.

A true grassroots effort will seek to identify the concerns of targeted lawmakers and allay them, rather than blanketing the airwaves with generic advertisements.

What will work for legislators based in the suburbs won’t work in rural areas or cities; therefore supporters will need a variety of approaches to break through.

Perhaps more importantly, groups will have to show the value of reform to communities without significant immigrant populations. In this they can receive support from outside groups such as the National Association of Manufacturers, which has spoken in favor of an overhaul by pointing out the economic benefits of reform .

A message that combines a market-based argument, an appeal to the nation’s fundamental value of openness, and the need for action to preserve the rule of law could be persuasive to skeptical members.

A senior House Republican told me recently that there are approximately 20 to 40 members of the conference that are opposed to any comprehensive immigration measure. That means that Speaker Boehner will likely need to find some Democratic support.

House Democrats therefore are at a crossroads. Do they want a law that may not contain everything they desire, or do they want an issue to use during the 2014 election cycle? Careful contemplation should convince Democrats that governing is preferable to campaigning on this issue.

The Senate has already acted on immigration. They did so in a transparent way that allowed for ample amendments and debate. As is often the case there, when both sides have a chance to craft legislation, a final product can pass the 60-vote threshold. House leaders should keep that in mind as they work to get a final vote in their chamber.

A successful resolution could have a positive impact on Congress as a whole. Finding a win-win outcome on immigration may help build good will in the Capitol that could be of use during negotiations over the debt ceiling later in the year, which is certain to be extremely contentious.

While it may be difficult for the legislature’s approval ratings to go any lower, showing that Democrats and Republicans can work together will boost Americans’ faith in their elected leaders.

Resolving this issue will also have benefits for each political party.

After the 2012 presidential election it is clear that the GOP needs a broader coalition in order to win nationwide. The majority in the House needs to ignore the chimera of a 2014 primary challenge and focus instead on the bigger picture. With immigration resolved, Republicans will be on their way towards shedding the “Party of No” label and able to show how a bottom-up agenda focused on the individual is superior to a top-down model promulgated by the opposition.

Democrats will have delivered on a major 2012 campaign promise. It could also deflect voters’ attention away from the health care law, which remains unpopular.

Supporters of immigration reform are on the path to victory, but in order to cross the finish line they must have a plan to win August and the courage to stick to it.





headline: Obama's comments on race straight out of Al Sharpton's playbook
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Is Al Sharpton president of the United States? Or just attorney general?

I ask because it’s not clear where the rabble-rousing rev’s agenda ends and White House policy begins. These days, they are one and the same.

President Obama erased the final distinction Friday by describing the Florida shooting case exclusively in racial terms. Obama’s headline-grabbing statement that “Trayvon Martin could have been me” and his attempt to justify black anger were straight out of Sharpton’s playbook.

If the president felt the need to say something about race duty required him to emphasize the facts instead of endorsing racial manipulation.

Don’t get me wrong — a personal speech on race from the first black president could be a game-changer in the right context. But this one suffered a fatal flaw — it ignored the fact that race played absolutely no role in the trial, including in lawyer statements, the evidence, testimony and the jury’s unanimous verdict of not guilty. Even the FBI found no evidence of racism by defendant George Zimmerman.

If Obama felt the need to say something, duty required him to emphasize the facts instead of endorsing racial manipulation. Sadly, though, his remarks follow a recent pattern where he and Sharpton sing from the same page. Both distorted the case to paint a broad picture of blacks as victims of white racism and ignored Zimmerman’s half-Latino family.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Let's repeal most of our laws and let the market work its magic
byline: By John Stossel


There are now 175,000 pages’ worth of federal laws. Local governments add more.

I’m not so cynical that I think politicians pass laws just to control us. Someone always thinks: “This law is needed. This will protect people.”

But the cumulative effect of so many rules is to strangle life.

The cumulative effect of so many rules is to strangle life.

Yet lawyers like George Washington Law professor John Banzhaf want more rules.

Banzhaf requires his law students to sue people, just for practice.

“And we keep winning!” he bragged on my show.

They do. But his legal “victories” hardly benefit the public.

He and his students have sued Washington, D.C., hairdressers and dry cleaners for “discrimination” because they charge women more.

Of course, they charge women more for a reason. Women’s haircuts take longer. “Women get pampered,” said hairdresser Carolyn Carter. “Men just get a haircut.” Women’s clothing is more varied and doesn’t always fit dry-cleaning machines. The market sorts out these differences through differing prices.

But intrusive Washington, D.C., politicians write laws that say, “Discrimination ... cannot be justified by ... comparative characteristics of one group as opposed to another.”

So the poor defendants have to spend thousands on legal fees, while law students get their “practice.” A Korean dry cleaners association “went through three or four high-powered law firms” defending itself, Banzhaf says with pride.

Banzhaf’s lawsuits even got “ladies’ nights” banned at Washington, D.C., bars. Women liked “ladies’ night.” Men liked it because it brought more women into bars. Bars liked it; that’s why they did it. But the practice violates the lawyers’ concept of “equality.”

As if his lawsuits weren’t obnoxious enough, the real irony is that the cost of the suits is passed on to future customers. Businesses charge more to cover the cost of suits and complying with regulations.

Lawyers like Banzhaf aren’t elected, but their actions still govern our choices.

Tibor Machan, professor of business ethics at Chapman University, came on my show to say that we should object to Banzhaf on principle. “Is it right to manipulate people all the time, to treat them like they’re little children? The next step from the nanny state is the petty tyrannical state. And a dictatorial state.”

Machan echoes writer C.S. Lewis’ point that well-meaning tyrants are even more dangerous than purely selfish ones. Lewis wrote, “Those who torment us for our own good will torment us without end.”

The conceit of politicians and lawyers is that they think they can manage life through rules. So they keep adding more.

They don’t see that these rules gradually wreck life.

Critics of lawsuit abuse focus on the cost of litigation, but the bigger harm is that fearof lawsuits itself deprives us of good things.

-- Drug companies invented a vaccine against Lyme disease, but they won’t sell it, because they’re scared of lawyers.

-- Fearful medical device makers often stick to old technologies because trying something new, even if it’s better, risks a suit.

-- Monsanto developed a substitute for asbestos, a fire-resistant insulation that might save thousands of lives, but decided not to sell it because the company feared it might be sued.

We don’t even know how many wonderful life-enhancing products we might have today if innovators didn’t live in a climate of fear.

I don’t suggest that we should be at the mercy of rip-off artists. Some lawsuits are useful -- if businesses commit theft or fraud, they should be sued. But American law encourages suits. In other countries, if you sue and lose, you and your lawyer must pay the court bills of the people you dragged into court.

When I started consumer reporting, I believed that only legal rules could protect us. But it’s not true. The rules just give us a false sense of security.

The free market does a better job protecting consumers. Competition protects us.

Repeal most of the laws. Let the market work its magic.





headline: After Zimmerman verdict, Trayvon Martin isn't only victim
byline: By Jehmu Greene


Remember how angry you felt watching people celebrate O.J. Simpson's acquittal? Reactions ranging from "hallelujah" and "praise Jesus," to outright cheering, justifiably turned stomachs.

Multiplied by the anonymity and viciousness of social media, similar behavior after George Zimmerman's acquittal was just as disturbing.

Now that the verdict is in, whether you are numb, simmering, or celebrating, ask yourself, where do we go from here?

The Zimmerman trial raised valid questions about our criminal justice system. Questions that should be discussed and debated as vigorously as the case was in the media.

While the country is fixated on #JusticeforTrayvon shouldn't we also broaden the focus in an attempt to save all the other Trayvons that haven't yet been taken down by a bullet?

Are "stand your ground" laws enforced equitably in the 24 states that have them?

How many abused women are sitting in a prison for standing their ground?

Due to unconscious bias, do jurors value the lives of black men less than others?

On the other side of untempered jubilation, some responses to the verdict imply that if the predominantly white jury had convicted George Zimmerman it would mean black men's lives were valued in America.

Personally, I refuse to empower one jury, comprised of six women in Florida, to serve as the ultimate barometer of how we value my father, brothers', and nephews' lives. A truer measure lies in how we all respond to the murder epidemic plaguing minority communities.

Still reeling from a verdict that defied common sense, some believe Zimmerman's acquittal indicates "open season" on unarmed black men in America.

Using hyperbole to disguise the harsh reality of black men systematically hunting each other long before Zimmerman profiled, pursued, and killed Trayvon Martin isn't particularly helpful.

While the country is fixated on #JusticeforTrayvon, shouldn't we also broaden the focus in an attempt to save all the other Trayvons that haven't yet been taken down by a bullet?

The number one cause of death for young black men in America is murder. Most likely by a black man with an illegal gun, not by the police or a racial profiling neighborhood watchmen.

Rarely dothese murders receive a fraction of the attention and organizing resources that have been directed at holding Trayvon's murderer accountable.

The entertainment industrial complex revels in this ongoing "fratricide" and the mainstream media selectively highlights some of the more abominable activities, but largely America turns a blinds eye.

Are their lives less valuable than Trayvon's?

Have we been conditioned to disregard the murder of African-American boys and men unless they are killed by someone of another race or ethnicity? Now that folks are paying attention, what should we demand?

Petitions and peaceful protests calling for federal civil rights charges to be filed against Zimmerman will continue as urban communities drown in the blood of black murder victims without marches and saturated media coverage.

Blacks are 13% of the population and 50% of murder victims. Understandably, if you are committed to saving the lives of black men, signing a petition feels like using a spoon to empty a lake.

Some have rightly zoned in on repealing "stand your ground" laws. The roots of these laws come from feminist advocacy to protect domestic abuse victims who use deadly force to fend off abusers.

Perverted by the National Rifle Association and American Legislative Exchange Council, all attempts to curtail these dangerous and overreaching self-defense statutes should ensure there are no unintended consequences for battered women.

Though dangerous and directly linked to an increase in killings, repealing these laws would barely scratch the surface to address the staggering loss of black men's lives.

Now that America is paying attention, we can start by valuing their lives more.

The stupefying fact that the United States imprisons a larger percentage of its black population than South Africa did at the height of apartheid is indefensible.

Clear and consistent racial bias within the educational and criminal justice systems creates a funnel for the 32% of black males that will spend time in prison. Play-dates don't exist in the hood and gangs serving as childcare fuels the cycle of violence.

Activists used social media to draw national attention to Trayvon Martin's murder. Can the same relentless -- and successful -- pressure applied to the media and local, state, and federal officials be unleashed to demand that funding for K-12 arts and music programs, after school programs, and sports be increased in urban communities?

If states really do determine how many prison beds they will need in ten years by looking at third and fourth grade reading scores, Head Start funding decimated by the sequester needs to be restored. Immediately.

It costs $70,000 to implement a successful gun buy-back program. Surely there are philanthropists who can pony up that amount and more.

Are hoodie wearing allies -- Kim Kardashian, Mylie Cyrus, Lena Dunham, Andy Cohen, Judd Aptow, Drew Carey, Olivia Wilde and all their peers -- who were rightfully angered and activated by Trayvon's murder just as motivated to address the ongoing "fratricide?"

When a moment of silence for Trayvon at a concert is a necessary and touching tribute, imagine the impact thousands of "moments" at every concert can have, Beyonce?

Nevertheless, until we thoroughly address absentee fathers who refuse to take responsibility for the babies they produce with multiple mothers and young women having babies without the means to support them or the maturity to mother them, government social programs alone will never succeed.

Comprehensive sex education and increased access to birth control are imperative, but only a band-aid for a deep wound. We desperately need famous faces to cease and desist the glorification of promiscuity that runs rampant in "black culture."

Black leaders -- you know who you are -- you must stop manhandling your peers who choose to speak out about the staggering numbers of black babies born out of wedlock.

Shame on those folks who ostracized Bill Cosby for speaking the truth!

Thank you, President Obama for addressing this crisis at times. Please sir, can we have some more? And while you're at it Mr. President, please use your bully pulpit to encourage states to focus on following the American Bar Association's recommendations to address “racial and ethnic bias in the criminal justice system.” It includes recommendations for the DOJ as well.

We have a history of disagreeing with jury verdicts in America. From O.J. to Casey Anthony and now George Zimmerman. Being outraged that people are outraged defies common sense.

The increased attention is an opportunity that doesn't come along very often. Conventional wisdom is that elevated crime rates in black neighborhoods is a "black thing." Absolutely not, it's an American thing.

As whites, Latinos, and Asians, continue to link arms with African-Americans across the country, marching in solidarity for Trayvon, we all must come together again tostop the senseless slaughter of young black men. What better way to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Trayvon's life was valued?





headline: Pope Francis in Brazil -- you can't make this stuff up
byline: By Fr. Jonathan Morris


“Pope Francis’ car takes wrong turn and is nearly crushed by adoring throngs of young people” 

You can’t make this stuff up. 

Then again, not even the most creative Vatican watcher could have predicted what Pope Francis would do since taking over as head of the 1.2 billion member Catholic Church on March 13, 2013 after the historic and surprising retirement of Pope Benedict XVI. 

Seventy-six-year-old Francis, the first pope of Latin American origin, began his pontificate of surprises when he was first introduced on the balcony of St. Peter’s Basilica.

Not even the most creative Vatican watcher could have predicted what Pope Francis would do since taking over as head of the 1.2 billion member Catholic Church.

His first words were markedly simple and conversational: “Buona Sera”—or “Good Evening!”But it was his parting gesture that evening that allowed the world to see into this man’s soul. The new pope bowed his head and asked the people to pray over him!

In the following days, Pope Francis, or “Francis,” as he prefers to sign his name, continued his surprises.

- He went personally to the local hotel in Rome where he was staying prior to the conclave to pay his open bill.

- He called the paper boy in Argentina to cancel his subscription.

- He refused to move into the papal apartments that had been recently renovated for the next pope and preferred instead to live permanently in a guest house within the Vatican.

- He decided to say mass every day for visitors and workers of that same guest house.

- He set aside the use of donated Mercedes Benz vehicles for transportation within Rome and chose instead to ride in a 2008 Ford Focus.

- Most importantly, he set up a commission of serious reformers to make suggestions to him about how to clean up a culture of clerical careerism and corruption in the Catholic Church’s central offices (the “curia”).

And now, on his first international trip, Pope Francis is riding through the streets of the beautiful (and sometimes dangerous) city of Rio de Janeiro in a Fiat mini-van, with windows rolled down, and a very reduced security team. 

The numbers have not been confirmed as to how many hundreds of thousands, or even millions, of young people have travelled to Rio for “World Youth Day” to see this simple man who calls himself Francis. But regardless of the numbers those who are present are sure to hear a very simple message.

It’s the message he has been communicating to the world sometimes in simple phrases that all of us can understand, but mostly by his actions: 

“The meaning of life and happiness are found in a personal relationship with God and in love of our neighbor—especially the most needy. On the other hand, the pursuit of power and wealth for selfish purposes, eventually ends in frustration”.

Now, that’s what I think he will say to youth of the world gathered this week in Brazil, but then again, Pope Francis is full of surprises. 





headline: Seven ways to inspire your kids' summer reading
byline: By Jim Denney


Summertime is the best time of year for kids—and the perfect time to inspire your children with a love of reading. Encourage them to associate reading with fun, adventure, and warm memories, and they'll be hooked on reading for life. As parents, we need to think strategically about ways to instill a love of reading in our kids, from their preschool years through their teenage years. Here are seven suggestions:

1. Create a cozy reading nook for your child. The ideal book nook should contain a comfortable chair with easy-to-reach bookshelves, bookmarks, a dictionary, and maybe an ebook reader. (Kids love ebooks!)

2. Creatively combine reading with meals and snack. Serve soup with readings from Louse Ehlert's "Growing Vegetable Soup," which tells how vegetables are grown. Or read Marjorie Priceman's "How to Make an Apple Pie" with your child -- a tour of all the places apple pie ingredients come from -- then make a pie together.

3. Start a family book review blog. Have family members post book reviews, lists of favorite books, stories about author visits at school, and other book-related postings. Teach your kids to enjoy discussing the books they read.

Encourage your children to associate reading with fun, adventure, and warm memories, and they'll be hooked on reading for life.

4. Read the book and see the movie. Then discuss. Some conversation starters: How was the movie different from the book? Why do you think the filmmakers made those changes? What was the moral of the story? What would you have done differently if you were the author or filmmaker?

5. Encourage your child to write and illustrate a book. Kids learn what it's like to be an author by making up a story and sharing it with others.

When my son was in kindergarten, he came to me and said, "Daddy, would you help me? I want to write a book about a boy who invents a time machine." We worked on the project together for a week. My son eventually lost interest—but I didn't. I wrote it up as a book proposal and sold it to a publisher. That idea became the four-book "Timebenders" series—and I dedicated the first book, "Battle Before Time," to my son, who gave me the idea.

6. Encourage kids to adapt their favorite books to other mediums. Kids enjoy making drawings, collages, dioramas, and puppet shows based on characters and events in their favorite books. Encourage your young readers to explore the worlds of their favorite books.

7. Read with your kids. How long should you keep reading to your kids? As long as they'll let you.

Jim Brozina is a retired school librarian in Millville, New Jersey. As a single parent, he worried that he and his daughter Kristen might drift apart. So Jim came up with a plan to maintain the father-daughter bond: They would read together every night for a hundred nights.

Jim and ten-year-old Kristen began with L. Frank Baum's "The Wizard of Oz". They finished that book and kept on going, night after night after night. What began as a hundred-night challenge became an unbreakable habit.

When Kristen was in high school, father and daughter were still reading together every night without fail. Kristen recalled her prom night: "Before I went out, I had my hair in my up-do and my fancy dress on. I climbed into the bed next to Dad and he read to me."

Their nightly ritual continued until Kristen went away to college. Jim helped Kristen move into the dorm, then father and daughter sat on the steps and read together one last time—from the book they began with, "The Wizard of Oz." They both choked up as they read. Their reading streak had lasted nearly nine years—3,218 consecutive nights.

After earning a degree in English Literature, Kristen wrote a 2011 book called "The Reading Promise: My Father and the Books We Shared." She wrote under the pen name Alice Ozma, taken from "Alice in Wonderland" and the "Oz" books.

Encouraging a child to read requires commitment. And, I can think of few commitments in life that could be more rewarding for both you and your child.





headline: Eliot Spitzer, Anthony Weiner -- New York voters seem to prefer sleazy over boring
byline: By Michael Goodwin


What’s the matter with New York? More to the point, what’s the matter with New Yorkers?

The question takes on new and urgent meaning after the latest poll showing Eliot Spitzer stomping his primary opponent in the comptroller’s race and Anthony Weiner leading the Democratic mayoral pack. The laugh-out-loud jokes about the perv-palooza campaign suddenly feel stale now that the sex-crazed pols are serious contenders.

This is no laughing matter. Both could win. There, I said it.

The races are different — Spitzer has only one opponent, Weiner has four major ones — but something strange is afoot in both primaries. Or maybe it’s not so strange.

The laugh-out-loud jokes about the perv-palooza campaign suddenly feel stale now that the sex-crazed pols are serious contenders.

Maybe it’s actually as simple as this: Voters are mad as hell about politicians-as-usual and they’re not going to take it anymore.

Say what you will about Spitzer and Weiner, but they break the mold, to a fault, of course. But that might be good enough in this lackluster field.

They embody, in their own weird ways, what the late, great Murray Kempton wrote about John Lindsay and his opponents in the 1965 campaign: “He is fresh and everyone else is tired.”

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: Sergeant who released Boston bomber photos should be fired
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Sergeant Sean Murphy, the Massachusetts State Police tactical photographer who released bloody photographers of accused mass murderer Dzokhar Tsarnaev to Boston Magazine, says he did so to counter the glorification of Tsarnaev on the cover of Rolling Stone. 

First of all, Rolling Stone should be boycotted by anyone who cares even a bit about America. 

Tsarnaev is, of course, a suspect in the Boston Marathon bombing, which killed and maimed dozens on April 15 of this year. 

When the magazine published a handsome photograph of Tsarnaev, with blown dry hair and a come-hither expression, looking like a rock star, the editors defined themselves as reprehensible profiteers who have no respect for the victims of the Boston massacre and no regard for our way of life—which, thank God, gives them every right to publish whatever they want. They abused that right, and no one should buy another copy of their magazine, unless the editor-in-chief resigns.

So, along comes Sergeant Sean Murphy. He figured he would set things right by distributing ugly photos of Tsarnaev, including one with a red laser dot on the center on his forehead. Trouble is, distributing police photographs to the press without permission from higher-ups at the Massachusetts State Police is prohibited. So Murphy was suspended on Friday, pending the results of a hearing about his behavior.

Here’s what should happen next: Murphy should be fired. Not suspended. Not disciplined. Fired. Gone. 

He distributed photographs to the press which were part of an ongoing investigation. The photographs which were expressly meant to depict Tsarnaev in a dangerous and grotesque way and could make it that much harder to find an impartial jury to hear the charges against him. Maybe Rolling Stone will hire him, but even that magazine might want someone who follows the rules of their organization.

See, there’s a bigger issue here than whether you hate Dzokhar Tsarnaev or are absolutely certain that he is guilty-as-charged. And the bigger issue is that in America you are supposed to be considered innocent until proven guilty and not have the state police carry on a campaign to discredit you and make sure the public considers you a monster, before you stand trial. 

Because it may be Dzokhar Tsarnaev today and you tomorrow. 

Maybe the IRS decides you should be prosecuted for tax evasion and some hotshot, rogue agent who thinks you’re guilty as hell releases lots of photos of you shopping for a Rolex watch—which maybe you could afford, anyhow, but which might just get jurors heads in the place where they can lock you away for a good, long time.

On balance—comparing Dzokhar Tsarnaev (if guilty) and Sergeant Sean Murphy—
the bigger threat to America is Murphy. Because you can’t blow up a marathon and do much other than harden the steel in the spine of this country that resists those who seek to destroy it. But you can work from inside the system to hijack people’s understandable anger and turn it in on itself in a way that jeopardizes America’s freedoms. And when you do that you destroy the trust Americans have in their institutions—like law enforcement.

Friedrich Nietzsche once wrote, “He who fights with monsters should look to it that he himself does not become a monster. And when you gaze long into an abyss the abyss also gazes into you.”

Well, the abyss has gazed into Sergeant Sean Murphy. And he has come up lacking. And he should not be policing anyone or anything, other than himself, in the future.





headline: Janet Napolitano’s Orwellian legacy
byline: By John Whitehead


To those who have watched with dismay as America has gradually been transformed into a police state, there is little room for regret over Janet Napolitano’s recent announcement that she is resigning her post as head of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).

Under Napolitano’s leadership, the DHS has managed to entrench the federal government’s power in an increasingly Orwellian America at great cost to Americans’ civil liberties.

The following are just some of Napolitano’s “greatest hits” when it comes to civil liberties violations. They are explored in greater depth in my new book, "A Government of Wolves: The Emerging American Police State."

1. If You See Something, Say Something: In December 2010, Napolitano created a partnership between DHS and America’s largest retailer, Wal-Mart, in order to encourage shoppers to report “suspicious” activity to store management. Likening the initiative to “the Cold War fight against communists,” Napolitano recorded a video message to be played at hundreds of Wal-Mart locations across the country, telling shoppers “if you see something, say something.”

This blatantly Orwellian citizen spying program also spread to other outlets including “Mall of America, the American Hotel Lodging Association, Amtrak, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, [and] sports and general aviation industries.”

2. Constitution-Free Border Control: Arguments aside over the need to control illegal immigration, the American border has become a model for the emerging American police state due in large part to the DHS.

Under Napolitano’s direction, the government’s efforts along the border have become little more than an exercise in police state power, ranging from aggressive checkpoints to the widespread use of drone technology, often used against American citizens traveling within the country.

Border patrol operations occur within 100 miles of an international crossing, putting some 200 million Americans within the bounds of aggressive border patrol searches and seizures, as well as increasingly expansive drone surveillance.

With 71 checkpoints found along the southwest border of the United States alone, suspicionless search and seizures on the border are rampant.

According to the ACLU: “Between October 1, 2008 and June 2, 2010, over 6,500 people — nearly 3,000 of them U.S. citizens — were subjected to a search of their electronic devices as they crossed U.S. borders.

DHS claims it has the right to conduct these invasive searches whenever it likes, to whomever it likes, and without having any individualized suspicion.”

3. Drones: Napolitano has already pushed for the expansion of drone surveillance from border zones to the interior of the United States.

Drone surveillance has expanded on the American-Canadian border in recent years, including drones patrolling the 950 miles of Washington state’s north border. 

A 2010 document signed by Napolitano and obtained by the Electronic Frontier Foundation via a Freedom of Information Act request shows that DHS has begun developing plans to mount so-called “non-lethal weapons” on drones operated by Customs and Border Protection. According to the document, the weapons would be used against “targets of interest,” described as people or vehicles carrying smugglers or undocumented immigrants.

4. Fusion Centers: While fusion centers—data collecting agencies spread throughout the country, aided by the National Security Agency (NSA)—were in operation prior to Napolitano’s ascension to the head of DHS, she doubled down on the program early on in her tenure, insisting “that Fusion Centers will be the centerpiece of state, local, federal intelligence-sharing for the future and that the Department of Homeland Security will be working and aiming its programs to underlie Fusion Centers.”

These fusion centers constantly monitor our communications, everything from our Internet activity and web searches to text messages, phone calls and emails. This data is then fed to government agencies, which are now interconnected—the CIA to the FBI, the FBI to local police—a relationship which will make a transition to martial law that much easier. As of 2009, the government admitted to having at least 72 fusion centers. A map released by the ACLU indicates that every state except Idaho has a fusion center in operation or formation.

5. Spying on Activists, Dissidents and Veterans: In 2009, DHS released three infamous reports on right wing and left wing “Extremism,” and another entitled "Operation Vigilant Eagle," outlining a surveillance program targeting veterans.

The reports collectively and broadly define extremists as individuals and groups “that are mainly antigovernment, rejecting federal authority in favor of state or local authority, or rejecting government authority entirely.” Napolitano curtly dismissed concerns by activists, journalists and veterans groups that the DHS was targeting people based upon their ideological beliefs.

Fast forward to 2013, when it was revealed that DHS, the FBI, state and local law enforcement agencies, and the private sector were working together to conduct nationwide surveillance on protesters’ First Amendment activities.

6. Stockpiling Ammunition: To add fuel to the fire, DHS has been stockpiling an alarming amount of ammunition in recent years, which only adds to the discomfort of those already leery of the government. According to Rep. Jason Chaffetz, DHS currently has 260 million rounds of ammo in stock, which averages out to between 1,300 to 1,600 rounds per officer. The US Army, meanwhile, has roughly 350 rounds per soldier.

7. TSA: Under the direction of the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) which falls under DHS authority, American travelers have been subjected to all manner of searches ranging from whole-body scanners and enhanced patdowns at airports to bag searches in train stations.

Visible Intermodal Prevention and Response (VIPR) task forces, comprised of federal air marshals, surface transportation security inspectors, transportation security officers, behavior detection officers and explosive detection canine teams laid the groundwork for the government’s effort to secure so-called “soft” targets such as malls, stadiums, bridges, etc.

Some security experts predict that checkpoints and screening stations will eventually be established at all soft targets, such as department stores, restaurants, and schools. Given the virtually limitless number of potential soft targets vulnerable to terrorist attack, subjection to intrusive pat-downs and full-body imaging will become an integral component of everyday life in the United States.

8. Defending the NSA: In the wake of Edward Snowden’s revelations about the immensity of the NSA’s spying programs, Napolitano has defended the NSA’s actions. Insisting that there are “lots of protections built into the system,” Napolitano remarked, “I think people have gotten the idea that there’s an Orwellian state out there that somehow we’re operating in. That’s far from the case… No one should believe that we are simply going willy-nilly and using any kind of data that we can gather.”

The reality, of course, is that we are indeed living in an Orwellian state engineered in no small part by "Big Sister" herself.





headline: In this country, we are just one race -- American
byline: By Jeffrey Scott Shapiro


The Zimmerman case and the death of Trayvon Martin have awakened feelings of racial disharmony across America.

Not since the O.J. Simpson case has our nation been so divided along racial lines with whites supporting the verdict that acquitted George Zimmerman and African-Americans demanding a civil rights investigation from the U.S. Department of Justice.

It is tragic however, that race, not truth, has become the currency of so many people’s decision making when it comes to justice.

Despite a preliminary investigation by the FBI and an exhaustive prosecution by the State of Florida, not a single shred of evidence demonstrating racial prejudice on Zimmerman’s behalf has come to light.

Zimmerman may have been lonely or looking for a reason to interact with the local police department, but his 911 calls do not demonstrate a pattern of racism or racial targeting.

If anything, the 46 911 calls Zimmerman made since 2004 demonstrate an over-active resident who reported everything from loose canines, illegally parked cars, pool parties and open garage doors.

Zimmerman may have been lonely or looking for a reason to interact with the local police department, but the calls do not demonstrate a pattern of racism or racial targeting.

Still, millions of Americans, particularly those in the liberal media seem to want Zimmerman to be a racist. They also seem to want Zimmerman to be white even though he is Hispanic.

Unfortunately, this is indicative of our political climate the past several years.

An unspoken, reverse-presumption has arisen in the U.S. that whites are racist until proven otherwise. If a white person engages in an argument, confrontation or even disagrees with a black person, suspicion immediately arises that the white person may be racist.

Living in that kind of fear is not the America that civil rights heroes such as Martin Luther King, Jr., Robert F. Kennedy or Medgar Evers envisioned or wanted.

In fact, when in 2003 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Virginia v. Black that it was unlawful to burn a cross with the intent to intimidate, justices based their decision on the notion that every person has the right to live their life free from fear. But when you live in a country where you know you can be falsely accused of racism simply for challenging someone with a different skin color, you have no choice but to live in fear.

In a strange twist of irony, whites now have to chill their own free speech and exercise caution about what they say to blacks -- not entirely dissimilar to the what blacks had to do when they spoke to whites before the civil rights era. Of course, the consequences for whites are not as severe as they were for blacks and that fact should not be forgotten. Still, no form of discrimination is just.

This unintended impact of reverse-racism was not the purpose of the civil rights movement. The purpose of civil rights is for everyone to be treated equally, not shift advantages and disadvantages from one race to another.

The death of Trayvon Martin was a tragedy for both the Martin and Zimmerman families, but instead of this tragedy inspiring “calm reflection” as the president called for, the opposite is occurring.

More than ever, people are feeling outraged, angry and racially divided, and what is most frightening is that some people are expressing that anger.

In the wake of the Zimmerman acquittal, unjustified acts of violence committed by blacks against whites in the name of Trayvon Martin have been reported in Baltimore, Mississippi and Washington, D.C.

These acts, if anything, tarnish the memory of Trayvon Martin since it is clear that his parents would never want his legacy tied to acts of retaliatory, racially inspired violence.

After all, the color of one’s skin is not what defines a person’s character. It is their intent and their actions.

To presume that anyone is racist because of the color of their skin is in itself prejudiced. That is what prejudice means—to "pre-judge." Calling someone a racist when there is no evidence of such prejudice just because someone white is racist in itself.

There is no doubt that at one time there was an understandable need for the phrase, “African-American.” A century of slavery and two centuries of racism proved that not all people were treated equally in the United States, and even after the 13th Amendment prohibition against slavery and the 14th Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause were enacted by Congress, whites still did not show appropriate respect to blacks.

But since the U.S. Supreme Court decided cases such as Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 and Loving v. Virginia in 1967, and Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 our country has dramatically evolved.

Classifying individuals by race—African-American, Asian-American, Latin-Americans or anything other ‘kind of-American’ does not unite our nation. It is the opposite of E pluribus unum: out of many, one.

As U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia said in Adarand Constructors v. Pena, “In the eyes of the government there is just one race here. It is American.”

Scalia was right, but that view should not be limited to the government. It should be within the eye of every citizen-beholder. To presume that anyone is racist simply because of the color of his or her skin is racist in itself.

We can no longer afford to let the past define our future. Although the crimes of slavery and racial hatred should never be forgotten, they should not be unjustifiably impugned upon people in the present who do not deserve it.

Everyone deserves an equal chance to be recognized for who they are, not the color of their skin.





headline: Scary lessons for Americans and ObamaCare from UK's National Health Service
byline: By Cal Thomas


The power of television to shrink the world has always amazed me. Eating lunch on the road to Ft. William, a man at the next table recognizes me and introduces himself.

Keith Farrington says he spent 15 years working as an assistant director of finance for the South East Thames Regional Health Authority, part of the National Health Service. He has strong warnings for the U.S. about ObamaCare.

"The main problem is that the NHS is seen as free on delivery to everybody," Farrington said. "It is not free. The clinicians have not been trained to think about finance and budgetary control as important.

Why do people believe government is more competent than the private sector, despite numerous examples to the contrary?

For example, overseas citizens can obtain an NHS number when they visit a doctor's office. This number is seen as a passport to full NHS care, including operations and aftercare because the clinicians say it is not their job to sort out who is eligible and who is not. In this way, billions of pounds are spent on noneligible folk. ... word has got round in Nigeria, Ghana, India and Pakistan that it is possible to receive treatment on the UK taxpayer without restraint and cheaper than paying in their own countries."

Obama claims that won't happen here. "The reforms I am proposing," he said in 2009, "would not apply to those who are here illegally." Partly true. With ObamaCare, non-citizens would not be covered and would not be subject to the individual mandate, but they could still walk into any ER and get treated on the taxpayer's dime.

With such open-ended spending in the U.K., the predictable has occurred. The NHS faces a 30 billion pound deficit by 2020 and, according to Tim Kelsey, director for patients and information at NHS England, is set to "run out of cash."

Each time I visit the U.K. I read about NHS horror stories. The Scottish Daily Mail reported on three brutal killings that might have been prevented were it not for a "catalogue of failings by a (NHS-operated) mental health trust." One of the men had been refused treatment for failing to register with a local doctor.

An investigation by the U.K. Daily Telegraph found that some patients are forced to wait up to eight hours inside ambulances because there are not enough beds inside hospitals.

Senior NHS doctors and managers say up to 20 hospitals across the country may close to avoid financial ruin.

If you are sick on a weekend, fewer doctors are available.

The Telegraph quotes senior officials as saying 4,000 lives a year are lost because of poor weekend care. These officials call the current trend in the NHS "unsustainable."

One health minister referred to scandals and cover-ups in patient deaths at two hospitals as part of a "rotten culture" in the NHS.

In March, the Daily Mail reported "Nearly 1,200 people have starved to death in NHS hospitals" because "nurses are too busy to feed patients."

At Stafford Hospital, police are investigating the deaths of 300 patients over a four-year period. They suspect neglect, even criminality, may have contributed to their deaths.

In February, the Telegraph reported "More than 3,000 people may have died unnecessarily at five NHS trusts."

Why isn't this a lesson for the U.S.? Why do people believe government is more competent than the private sector, despite numerous examples to the contrary?

The Obama administration is pressing ahead with implementing America's version of the NHS, no doubt expecting different results.

Though postponing the employer mandate until 2015, beginning Oct. 1, the administration plans to start sending money to states that have already set up health care exchanges. As Washington Examiner columnist Byron York has noted, the sooner people become dependent on this latest government program the more difficult it will be to overturn the law.

Keith Farrington has a "you'll be sorry" attitude toward America concerning its version of an NHS. He is shocked that we would scuttle one of the best health systems in the world -- even with its imperfections, which can be fixed -- for one in which government controls a key part, which he predicts will produce results similar to the UK.

He speaks from experience. Is anyone in America listening?



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Obama White House falsely blames Ambassador Patterson for Morsi mess
byline: By Robert O'Brien, Robert O’Brien


In Josh Rogin’s and Eli Lake’s Daily Beast column this week, current and former “Obama administration officials” anonymously attempt to shift blame for President Obama’s failed engagement with Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood to career foreign service officer and current U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Anne Patterson.

While such spin from the White House and its political allies is not surprising given America’s rudderless Middle-East policy, the Obama administration’s latest effort is both a red herring and disrespectful to one of our nation’s finest diplomats.

I personally saw Ambassador Patterson’s commitment to U.S. national security policy at the UN where she served as a deputy and acting Chief of Mission during the Bush administration.

It was President Obama’s demand that Patterson engage the Muslim Brotherhood. For administration staffers to now suggest that it was Patterson’s policy is ridiculous.

Patterson was relentless in standing up to America’s adversaries at Turtle Bay and took on anyone who stood in the way of America’s priorities. 

Such conduct was to be expected from Patterson, who had previously been America’s Ambassador to Columbia, during which time she was under constant threat from drug lords and leftist guerrillas.

In subsequent assignments, Patterson served as Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement, where she ran America’s efforts to eradicate Afghanistan’s poppy plantations and cut off the Taliban’s narco-profits, and as Ambassador to Pakistan, during the past several years where a fragile Pakistan also changed leadership.

Patterson is no neophyte. She certainly understands that it is not in America’s interest to have an Islamist party in charge of Egypt. 

I am sure she would have been happier if Washington had done more to support the secularists, moderate Muslims and Christians in Egypt, who longed for a rule-of-law based society after the fall of US ally Hosni Mubarak.But that was not the administration’s policy in Egypt or in the region.

When the Green Revolution was unfolding on the streets of Tehran, there was silence from the White House and the Mullahs’ tightened their grip in Iran.

When the moderate opposition to Assad was desperate for our support in Syria, little was forthcoming from this Administration. Moderates were sidelined there as they were in Egypt. 

Once the Muslim Brotherhood gained power in Cairo, Patterson, as the implementer of the White House’s foreign policy had to deal with that reality.

The U.S. ambassador is the president’s representative in a foreign land. It is the president’s policy that our ambassadors implement.

It was President Obama’s demand that Patterson engage the Muslim Brotherhood. For administration staffers to now suggest that it was Patterson’s policy is ridiculous.

No one should be surprised by the course this administration chose. Then-Senator Obama made it clear in his 2008 debate clash with Hillary Clinton that he believes America "has to talk to its enemies." Indeed, at the same time that the administration was engaging the Muslim Brotherhood in Cairo, it was setting up peace talks with the Taliban in Qatar, to the apparent chagrin of our ally President Hamid Karzai in Kabul.

Now that a large swath of the Egyptian people, backed by the Army, has removed President Morsi and the Muslim Brothers from office, unnamed administration officials believe that the Arkansas-born Patterson, who has excelled under presidents from both political parties and is respected on both sides of the aisle, should be the scapegoat. That cannot be allowed to happen.





headline: Mr. Obama, the Zimmerman trial is over, can we please move on?
byline: By Erick Erickson


The death of Trayvon Martin was a tragedy. A jury of six in Florida has determined it was not criminal, but George Zimmerman will forever be the man who killed a 17-year-old.

No one can be happy about what happened other than, for Zimmerman and his family, that a jury believed him.

Now the NAACP and others are calling for Attorney General Eric Holder to file charges against George Zimmerman. Never mind that federal investigators looked into the matter and concluded Zimmerman did not engage in racial profiling.

A boy is dead. A man's life ruined. And too many are trying to capitalize on the politics of now.

Should the U.S. Department of Justice decide to pursue charges, it would not be double jeopardy. The state and federal governments remain separate entities with separate jurisdictions. A trial in one does not preclude another.

But in this case it should.

I understand why so many in the black community feel there was an injustice. The original injustice was that George Zimmerman was not arrested for the crime.

NBC News and other news outlet compounded the sense of injustice by selectively editing 911 phone calls to make Zimmerman's statements sound worse than they were. 

Zimmerman was eventually arrested, charged, and tried and a jury found him not guilty of both murder and manslaughter.

The State of Florida listened and acted.

A judge allowed the prosecution to add manslaughter as a possible crime at the end of the trial.

Still, a jury concluded Zimmerman is not guilty.

Our system is not perfect, but it is preferable to rule by the mob. Juries are not perfect, but they are better than the court of public opinion.

Many will feel justice was not served, but it was. Justice does not mean getting the outcome one side desires. Even so, those who are glad of the verdict should try to understand why so many feel so cold by what has happened and some see injustice.

I see too much politicization by too many people on more than one side. A boy is dead. A man's life ruined. And too many are trying to capitalize on the politics of now.

As the president said yesterday, a jury has spoken. It is time to respect the verdict of that jury and move on. Trayvon Martin will never come back and George Zimmerman may be free, but it will be a long time, if ever, before his life returns to normal.

Our country still has much to learn about itself. Sadly, too many profit from us not learning and fanning the flames of hostility. Those who have legitimate grievance in the verdict — and they do exist beyond Trayvon Martin's family — are drowned out by those whose only grievance is their inability to profit as much as they may from this tragedy.

We should all embrace the quiet dignity shown by Trayvon Martin's parents these last few days and embrace the President's words:

"We are a nation of laws and a jury has spoken. I now ask every American to respect the call for calm reflection from two parents who lost their young son."

Mr. Obama, I hope your administration will make it clear that it is time to embrace the better angels of ourselves and move on from this tragedy. A federal trial does not do that and I am heartened by your words yesterday that you seem to recognize this.





headline: The next general in the war on men’s pay
byline: By Carrie Lukas


Having skewered Republicans in 2012 with accusations of a conservative “War on Women,” President Obama is marching ahead to expand government’s reach, particularly in the name of protecting women and promoting “gender pay equity.”

Meet Obama’s new General in this effort: Ms. Katherine Archuleta, his nominee to lead the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).

OPM is the government’s chief human resource agency, and as such, can be a powerful weapon in laying the groundwork for greater government oversight over compensation practices. Men struggling economically should take note:They may be among the collateral damage of government’s campaign to build a more “equitable” economy.

If you are a man who is struggling economically take note: you may be among the collateral damage of government’s campaign to build a more “equitable” economy.

The OPM’s primary responsibility is to oversee the compensation system for the 2.7 million member federal civilian workforce.Currently, however, the OPM is also developing a government-wide strategy for advancing “pay equity,” a task Archuleta will take over if confirmed.

These marching orders were issued in May in a presidential memorandum. OPM must analyze agencies’ compensation practices to identify factors that contribute to differences in average pay between men and women, develop guidance for creating greater transparency about salary determinations, and recommend additional actions—studies or legislation—for narrowing any gender pay gap.

This is part of the OPM’s mission to “make the Federal government America’s model employer for the 21stcentury.”Sadly, the administration’s plan of attack rests of some shoddy reconnaissance work. The presidential memo mischaracterizes the enemy, lamenting that, “women are paid 77 cents for every dollar paid to men,” and that these “unjust pay disparities are a detriment to women, families, and our economy.”

Yet study after study has shown that the statistical gap between men and women’s earnings can’t simply be blamed on discrimination.

In fact, the different choices that men and women make—such as about what subject to study, profession to enter, specialty to pursue, and the number of hours to devote to their jobs—are the primary drivers of the differences in men and women’s average earnings. 

For example, when looking specifically at the federal workforce, the Government Accountability Office found that in 2007 all but seven cents of the wage gap between men and women could be explained by occupation, experience, and levels of education. Note that this does not mean that seven percent is entirely a product of discrimination, only that it could not be explained by these factors.

Ms. Archuleta who was the chief of staff at the Department of Labor from 2009-11 should be familiar with this type of analysis, and the studies that show that, at a minimum, the 77-cents-on-the-dollar is a gross exaggeration of sexism’s role in impacting women’s earnings.

She seems, however, unencumbered with this inconvenient knowledge, and in her most recent post—as the National Political Director for the president's re-election organization, Obama for America—she proved herself an ideal soldier to advance the administration’s position.

Archuleta fired off tweets such as “@BarackObama is fighting for equal pay for women. All Mitt Romney has is a #SketchyDeal.” which is likely a depressingly accurate preview of the kind of deep analysis we can expect as the OPM develops its equal pay strategy under Archuleta.

Men can glean all they need to from the telling phrasing in the presidential memo, that the goal is to “narrow any gender pay gap.”

This isn’t about rooting out discrimination. No, the purpose is simply to make the statistics work so that the average working women earns the same as the average working man, regardless of whether differences in pay were based on legitimate factors.

Salary decisions, such as to pay more for positions that require certain expertise or that include exposure to danger or grueling conditions, may be found out-of-bounds if men disproportionately take advantage of these high-earning options. 

The OPM’s new strategy will first influence the federal workforce, but that should be little comfort to the private sector.

It’s easy to imagine how this “guidance” will quickly spill into the broader economy, first as a condition to be eligible for any government contract and then as outright regulations and mandates.

The end result won’t simply be higher pay for women and lower pay for men. The real outcome will be a less flexible, less dynamic workplace as government moves further into regimenting the compensation practices of American employers.

President Obama believes Ms. Archutela is the right person to lead government’s new charge into employment contracts. Americans should ask themselves: Is this campaign really in our national interest?





headline: Let's butt out in Egypt and let Egyptians sort out their own problems
byline: By John Stossel


Do you pay taxes? Then you contributed to the $2 billion your government gave Egypt this year. And last year. And every year -- for 30 years. Most of it went to Egypt’s military. How’s that worked out?

Now our government will “cautiously” support anti-government rebels in Syria, even though some are openly allied with Al Qaeda.

Years before, we paid to arm and train the Mujahedeen, the Islamic holy warriors battling the Russians in Afghanistan. That conflict led to the rise of Al Qaeda. One of the Mujahedeen factions went on to become the Taliban, with whom we now fight.

With power changing hands in Egypt once again, maybe it’s time for us to butt out.

Advocates of foreign intervention argue that our government must aid friends and fight obvious foes, and that the world would be in worse shape had we not intervened. They say it’s important that America send soldiers overseas to acquire “influence” in the world.

I don’t buy it.

It’s important to defend ourselves. We were right to retaliate after 9/11 and after the Japanese bombed Hawaii. But often politicians think: When in doubt, America must “lead.” I wish they thought: When in doubt, stay out.

Political essayist Randolph Bourne famously wrote, “War is the health of the state.” He was right. Whenever there is war, government grows in power, as he saw happening in the U.S. during World War I. The public longs to be led to safety. People will tolerate sacrifices and civil liberties violations in wartime that they never would tolerate in peacetime.

Once they acquire political power, even silly leftists embrace military action. After Sept. 11, Sen. Charles Schumer, (D-N.Y.), declared that the “era of a shrinking federal government is over.” In fact, government had never shrunk. For politicians like Schumer, a terrorist attack was another excuse to spend more.

Most Americans didn’t object -- anything to stop terror. Political and military leaders often exaggerate threats.

Adm. Mike Mullen, a chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under both George W. Bush and Barack Obama, said of the post-9/11 world, “This is the most dangerous time I’ve seen growing up the last four decades.”

This the most dangerous time? More than when Soviet nuclear missiles were pointed at us? That's absurd.

9/11 was horrible. But it was an unusually successful attack. Even if there were a similar attack every decade, that would kill far fewer Americans than house fires. Or stairs. Or bathtubs even. Of course, our brains are wired to react more strongly to the dramatic attack. But that fear leads us to spend big on things that don’t add to our safety.

Some current Egyptian protesters are angry at America -- not because they are Islamists who support terrorism, but because they support secular, classical-liberal figures like the late Mohammed Noah, who encouraged free markets and outreach to Israel. They resent the U.S. government for backing people like former Egyptian president Mohammed Morsi.

The U.S. government does at least criticize leaders like Morsi, and Hosni Mubarak before him, when they behave in authoritarian ways -- but we don’t stop selling them military hardware.

Defense contractors don’t have much incentive to obsess about what regimes will do later with the weapons sold to them now.

With power changing hands in Egypt once again, maybe it’s time for us to butt out. Let them sort out their own politics -- instead of us helping train police and arm soldiers who beat up the protesters who may become the next generation of leaders.

Suggesting that will get me called an “isolationist.” But there’s nothing isolationist about it. America can have a huge impact on the rest of the world even without deploying the military or government-funded foreign aid. We already do.

Let our movies play in theaters across the world. Let our rock music alarm mullahs. And let neoconservatives fund overseas sales of books filled with ideas local autocrats consider dangerous. But the neocons should spend their own money -- not taxpayers’.





headline: Double standards and Zimmerman verdict
byline: By Cal Thomas


We are so programmed by our history with race in America that reaction to the acquittal of George Zimmerman on charges of murdering Trayvon Martin depends largely upon one's individual, even group experience.

If you are African-American, you might react like former Washington, D.C., homicide detective Rod Wheeler. Appearing on Fox News, Wheeler said many blacks look at quarterback Michael Vick, jailed for taking part in an illegal dog-fighting ring, and wonder why Zimmerman gets away with killing a young black man.

If you are white, or Hispanic, you could possibly see the trial as something whipped up by the always racially conscious media and rhetorical bomb-throwers like Rev. Al Sharpton.

You might conclude that if the victim had been white and the perpetrator black the media would have shown little or no interest.

What helps keep us divided is our propensity for labeling and categorizing.

Your view would be reinforced by a case in Georgia in which four African-American teenagers beat a 36-year-old white man as he emerged from a gas station convenience store. While trying to escape, the man stumbled into the middle lane of a highway where he was struck by a car and killed. The Marietta Daily Journal reported that the four are charged with felony murder, aggravated assault and violation of the Georgia Street Gang Act. The incident occurred two weeks ago, but I have seen no national media coverage.

As defense lawyers noted after the Zimmerman verdict, the loss of any life, especially a young one, is a tragedy, but tragedy and race were not on trial in Sanford, Florida. Putting all extraneous considerations aside, the jury of six women was asked if there was sufficient evidence to convict Zimmerman of murder or manslaughter. They found there was not.

The Justice Department says it will look into the shooting death of Martin to determine if evidence in the case "reveals a prosecutable violation." That may turn out to be more of a political decision than one based on facts. It would likely perpetuate the media narrative of blacks as victims and whites (one CNN reporter ludicrously called Zimmerman a "white Hispanic") as descendants of slave masters.

What helps keep us divided is our propensity for labeling and categorizing. Certain behaviors and language are tolerated, while others are not. Some people can get away with language that others cannot. Some faiths can be disparaged while others are insulated from criticism. What is needed is one standard. One national identity. One America. We're not there yet.

Benjamin Crump, an attorney for Trayvon Martin's family, compared Trayvon's death to those of Emmett Till and Medgar Evers. Any attempt to turn Trayvon into a civil rights martyr similar to Till and Evers goes well beyond the apples and oranges analogy.

More to the point was a comment by Zimmerman's attorney Don West: "The prosecution of George Zimmerman was disgraceful." The defense believes he should never have been brought to trial. Co-defense counsel Mark O'Mara speculated about "how many lawsuits will be spawned by this fiasco."

Probably quite a few, given our never-ending racial double standard. As both sides have noted, there are no winners in this case.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Spitzer, Weiner prove that sex sells -- even in politics
byline: By Michael Goodwin


It sucks to be Scott Stringer. The Manhattan borough president thought he could win the New York City mayor’s race, but early polls showed him at the back of the pack.

So he did what any realistic pol would do — he dropped down the food chain to run for comptroller. When others quit, Stringer faced no serious primary opponent and a likely cakewalk in the general election.

Then he got steamrolled. It started last Sunday night when news broke that mad dog Eliot Spitzer was jumping into the race. A week later, Spitzer’s decision is Stringer’s nightmare.

Early support for Weiner and Spitzer proves it’s not always good to get the government we deserve.

A snap poll showed Client No. 9 with a 9-point lead among Democrats. Then came the death of Stringer’s plan to try to knock Spitzer off the ballot.

Facing a hurdle of getting 3,750 petition signatures in four days, Spitzer pulled out his fat wallet and lined up enough workers to get 27,000 signatures. The odds are tiny that fewer than 3,750 were valid, so Stringer decided not to challenge them.

His sudden underdog status throws open a window on modern morality. The affable Stringer and his wife recently celebrated the birth of their second child, while Spitzer is notorious for his arrogance and getting caught patronizing prostitutes. Whether he is a changed man and whether he and his wife still share a bed is unclear.

Throw in Anthony Weiner’s decent shot at being the Democratic nominee for mayor despite his own sex scandal, and the lesson is clear: Sex sells, even in politics.

Voters will have the final say, of course, but the early support for Weiner and Spitzer proves it’s not always good to get the government we deserve.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: There is only tragedy in Zimmerman verdict
byline: By Erick Erickson


There is only tragedy in the Zimmerman trial. There are no sides but Justice to root for, but a Justice that will leave one side unsatisfied and still empty.

Both sides made mistakes in this awful mess. George Zimmerman may not be guilty of either murder or manslaughter, but he killed Trayvon Martin.

A 17-year-old is dead. A family has lost a son. And George Zimmerman must now now fear for his life because of hatred toward him stirred up by so many who politicized this mess.

There are no winners here save for Zimmerman's not guilty verdict. He will have to live with this for the rest of his life and, sadly, Trayvon Martin will never get that chance.

There is only tragedy here. There should not be politics here.

My prayers for Trayvon Martin, his family, George Zimmerman and his family, and the jury that did its job.

Have you not known? Have you not heard?

The Lord is the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth.
He does not faint or grow weary; his understanding is unsearchable.
He gives power to the faint, and to him who has no might he increases strength.
Even youths shall faint and be weary, and young men shall fall exhausted; but they who wait for the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings like eagles; they shall run and not be weary; they shall walk and not faint.
— Isaiah 40:28-31





headline: Why the competition of ideas matters
byline: By Arthur C. Brooks


It is a uniquely American belief that competition is the fuel for human flourishing. European commentators in early America were amazed at the popular love for what Alexis de Tocqueville called, “self-interest rightly understood.” This competitive ideal, Tocqueville noted, “Is as often asserted by the poor man as by the rich.”

The competitive ideal persists in America, by and large. The World Values Survey (WVS) in 2006 found that 55% of Americans told survey researchers, “Competition is good,” versus just 5% who said, “Competition is harmful.”

To understand just how much this attitude differs from the rest of the world, consider that the French in 2006 were about half as likely as Americans to say competition is good, nearly five times as likely to say that competition is harmful.

Competition in what? Business, sports, and politics, obviously—but other areas as well, that go back to America’s founding. For example, given their radical views on freedom of religion and the separation of church and state, it was clear that America’s founders believed in a competitive market for souls.

In a free society, some ideas spread while competing ideas do not. Following Jefferson, that competition is a true moral good.

Frequently overlooked but critically important is the competition of ideas. In an 1813 letter, Thomas Jefferson wrote, “That ideas should freely spread from one to another over the globe, for the moral and mutual instruction of man, and improvement of his condition, seems to have been peculiarly and benevolently designed by nature.”

In a free society, some ideas spread while competing ideas do not. Following Jefferson, that competition is a true moral good. It strengthens America’s free society by creating choice in the democratic process, fostering policy innovation, and providing a peaceful outlet for citizen discontent.

That is why it is so dangerous when powerful actors work not to win the competition of ideas, but instead to shut it down--by narrowing acceptable discourse, squashing protest, silencing minority viewpoints, and anathematizing people of opposing opinions.

Throughout our history, when unable to win the idea competition legitimately, unprincipled forces on both the right and left have taken the route of intimidation and personal attack to silence the ideas they dislike.

Today, there is no better example of shutting down the competition of ideas than the scandals at the Internal Revenue Service. As we now know, the IRS flagged and delayed conservative groups’ applications for nonprofit status, sometimes for years--and apparently long enough to keep many sidelined for the 2012 election.

My AEI colleague Stan Veuger shows in a new article appearing in the Quarterly Journal of Economics that tea party activism radically inflected voter turnout for Republicans in 2010. By suppressing the tea party, the IRS no doubt directly harmed Republicans in 2012. By how much? We will never know.

The best defense that administration officials and its apologists seem able to muster is a highly-dubious claim that the IRS may have also harassed and delayed some left-wing groups—missing the point entirely that shutting down the competition of ideas between citizens is the real scandal, especially for an agency of government.

What is the cost of this scandal? To begin with, it delegitimizes government and thus weakens democracy. By merging the objectives of bureaucracy and partisan politics, the IRS has shown ordinary Americans that conspiracy theorists might not be so crazy after all. And this will add fuel to the pervasive belief that the government simply cannot be trusted.

Trust in government before the scandal was already near an all-time low. According to the Pew Research Center, only 26% of Americans earlier this year said they trust the government “just about always,” or “most of the time.” Thank the IRS when this falls even further.

Another cost of this scandal, as Jefferson would surely point out, is moral. In our country today, citizens are not just wary of the IRS; they are frightened of the agency. Americans—especially those without sophisticated tax counsel or insider connections—feel completely vulnerable to IRS power, which seems arbitrary and capricious. For this agency then to wield its power over vulnerable citizens in a politically-motivated way violates the most basic moral standards of fairness.

To shut down the competition of ideas is a soft tyranny—both contrary to the principles of the nation, and as appears sadly likely, the legacy of our modern politicized bureaucracy.



Arthur C. Brooks is president of the American Enterprise Institute and the Beth and Ravenel Curry Scholar in Free Enterprise. He is author of "The Road to Freedom: How to Win the Fight for Free Enterprise" (Basic Books 2012).



headline: Above the law -- Obama's radical rejection of the rule of law has fatal consequences
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


Fidelity to the rule of law is the centerpiece of a free society. It means that no one is beneath the protection of the law and no one is absolved of the obligation to comply with it. The government may not make a person or a class of persons exempt from constitutional protections, as it did during slavery, nor may it make government officials exempt from complying with the law, as it does today.

Everyone who works for the government in the United States takes an oath to uphold the Constitution and the laws written pursuant to it.

In our system of government, we expect that Congress will write the laws, the courts will interpret them and the president will enforce them.

Indeed, the Constitution states that it is the president’s affirmative duty to enforce the law. That duty is not an abstract formulation. Rather, it means the president cannot decline to enforce laws with which he disagrees or whose enforcement might cause him or his political allies to lose popularity.

President Obama's radical rejection of the rule of law, which presents a clear and present danger to the freedom of us all, has had fatal consequences.

It also means the president cannot make up his own version of the law as a substitute for what the Constitution commands or Congress has written.

In the modern era, presidents have rejected the value of the rule of law and instead followed their own political interests. President George W. Bush, for example, while signing into law a federal statute prohibiting the government from reading your mail without a search warrant, boasted that he had no intention of enforcing that law -- and we know that he famously did not enforce it.

But no modern president has picked and chosen which laws to enforce and which to ignore and which to rewrite to the extremes of President Obama. His radical rejection of the rule of law, which presents a clear and present danger to the freedom of us all, has had fatal consequences.

The law requires that if American tax dollars are being given to the government of another country, and that government is toppled by its military -- the common phrase is a coup d’état -- the flow of cash shall stop immediately, lest we support financially those who have betrayed our values.

In Egypt, the military arrested the president, suspended the Constitution and installed a puppet regime. But Obama, embarrassed at the fall of the popularly elected but religiously fanatical government he supported, refuses to consider that military takeover a coup. Instead he has called it a popular uprising supported by the military, and he has continued the flow of your dollars into the hands of a military that has been murdering scores of peaceful demonstrators daily in the streets of Cairo.

The president’s signature domestic legislation -- ObamaCare -- is scheduled to become effective in stages. One of its provisions, requiring employers of more than 50 persons to offer health insurance acceptable to the feds to all of their employees, becomes effective on Jan. 1, 2014.

In anticipation of its becoming law, insurance carriers and employers have calculated that instead of costs going down, as the president promised, they will certainly go up, resulting in the loss of jobs. So the president, mindful of the midterm congressional elections in November 2014 and fearful that Democrats who supported this law might suffer at the polls at the hands of deceived and thus angry voters, announced on the Fourth of July weekend that he planned not to enforce that provision until Jan. 1, 2015.

When he wanted to use military force in Libya and Pakistan -- two allies -- without congressional approval, out of fear, no doubt, that Congress might turn him down, he dispatched the CIA to do his killing.

Why? Because federal law requires that he report all offensive use of the military to Congress and eventually obtain its approval for continued use. Because the CIA largely operates in secrecy, the president needn’t report its behavior publicly or even acknowledge that it took place.

In the same vein, he recently moved all records of the Usama bin Laden killing from the military -- which carried it out -- to the CIA.

Why? Because the military is largely susceptible to the Freedom of Information Act, which commands transparency, and the CIA is largely not. He probably fears that the truthful version of bin Laden’s demise will become known. If so, it would be the fourth version of those events his administration has given.

When he wanted to kill an American and his 16-year-old son in Yemen because the American, though uncharged with any crime and unasked to come home, might be difficult to arrest while advocating war in a foreign country, he wrote his own rules for governing his own killings. He did so in secret and notwithstanding clear language in the Constitution expressly prohibiting the government from taking life, liberty or property without due process of law.

And when he wanted to keep us safe from terrorists but servile to him by spying on all of us, he established an enormous network of domestic spies who have access to all of our phone calls, emails and text messages. And he did this despite unambiguous language in the Constitution requiring a search warrant based on particularized probable cause of crime about the records he wanted to seize or the venues he wanted to search.

What’s going on?

What we have is a runaway government, dismissive of the Constitution it has sworn to uphold, contemptuous of the law it is required to enforce and driven by its own values of maximum control and minimum personal freedom. And we have a Congress supine enough to let this happen, as well as a judiciary so tangled in its own arcane procedures that immeasurable human freedom will be destroyed and Obama out of office before any meaningful judicial review can be had.

Is this the rule of law? What shall we do about it?





headline: On this Fourth of July, Thomas Jefferson is weeping
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


Do you have more personal liberty today than on the Fourth of July 2012?

When Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence, he used language that has become iconic.

He wrote that we are endowed by our Creator with certain inalienable rights, and among them are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

Not only did he write those words, but the first Congress adopted them unanimously, and they are still the law of the land today.

By acknowledging that our rights are inalienable, Jefferson’s words and the first federal statute recognize that our rights come from our humanity -- from within us -- and not from the government.

Today we have a government that alone decides how much wealth we can retain, how much free expression we can exercise, how much privacy we can enjoy.

The government the Framers gave us was not one that had the power and ability to decide how much freedom each of us should have, but rather one in which we individually and then collectively decided how much power the government should have. That, of course, is also recognized in the Declaration, wherein Jefferson wrote that the government derives its powers from the consent of the governed.

To what governmental powers may the governed morally consent in a free society? We can consent to the powers necessary to protect us from force and fraud, and to the means of revenue to pay for a government to exercise those powers. But no one can consent to the diminution of anyone else’s natural rights, because, as Jefferson wrote and the Congress enacted, they are inalienable.

Just as I cannot morally consent to give the government the power to take your freedom of speech or travel or privacy, you cannot consent to give the government the power to take mine.

This is the principle of the natural law: We all have areas of human behavior in which each of us is sovereign and for the exercise of which we do not need the government’s permission. Those areas are immune from government interference.

That is at least the theory of the Declaration of Independence, and that is the basis for our 237-year-old American experiment in limited government, and it is the system to which everyone who works for the government today pledges fidelity.

Regrettably, today we have the opposite of what the Framers gave us. Today we have a government that alone decides how much wealth we can retain, how much free expression we can exercise, how much privacy we can enjoy. And since the Fourth of July 2012, freedom has been diminished.

In the past year, all branches of the federal government have combined to diminish personal freedoms, in obvious and in subtle ways.

In the case of privacy, we now know that the federal government has the ability to read all of our texts and emails and listen to all of our telephone calls -- mobile and landline -- and can do so without complying with the Constitution’s requirements for a search warrant.

We now know that President Obama authorized this, federal judges signed off on this, and select members of Congress knew of this, but all were sworn to secrecy, and so none could discuss it. And we only learned of this because a young former spy risked his life, liberty and property to reveal it.

In the past year, Obama admitted that he ordered the CIA in Virginia to use a drone to kill two Americans in Yemen, one of whom was a 16-year-old boy. He did so because the boy’s father, who was with him at the time of the murders, was encouraging militants to wage war against the U.S.

He wasn’t waging war, according to the president; he was encouraging it.

Simultaneously with this, the president claimed he can use a drone to kill whomever he wants, so long as the person is posing an active threat to the U.S., is difficult to arrest and fits within guidelines that the president himself has secretly written to govern himself.

In the past year, the Supreme Court has ruled that if you are in police custody and fail to assert your right to remain silent, the police at the time of trial can ask the jury to infer that you are guilty. This may seem like a technical ruling about who can say what to whom in a courtroom, but it is in truth a radical break from the past.

Everyone knows that we all have the natural and constitutionally guaranteed right to silence. And anyone in the legal community knows that judges for generations have told jurors that they may construe nothing with respect to guilt or innocence from the exercise of that right.

No longer. Today, you remain silent at your peril.

In the past year, the same Supreme Court has ruled that not only can you be punished for silence, but you can literally be forced to open your mouth. The court held that upon arrest -- not conviction, but arrest -- the police can force you to open your mouth so they can swab the inside of it and gather DNA material from you.

Put aside the legal truism that an arrest is evidence of nothing and can and does come about for flimsy reasons; DNA is the gateway to personal data about us all. Its involuntary extraction has been insulated by the Fourth Amendment’s requirements of relevance and probable cause of crime.

No longer. Today, if you cross the street outside of a crosswalk, get ready to open your mouth for the police.

The litany of the loss of freedom is sad and unconstitutional and irreversible. The government does whatever it can to retain its power, and it continues so long as it can get away with it. It can listen to your phone calls, read your emails, seize your DNA and challenge your silence, all in violation of the Constitution.

Bitterly and ironically, the government Jefferson wrought is proving the accuracy of Jefferson’s prediction that in the long march of history, government grows and liberty shrinks. Somewhere Jefferson is weeping.

Happy Fourth of July 2013.





headline: Military saved democracy in Egypt, not destroyed it
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Maybe it was the odd coincidence of the Egyptian military coup coming as Americans celebrated our glorious Independence Day. Or maybe it was a gut reaction to the sainted word “democracy” being violated.

Whatever the cause, many Americans were not happy about events in Egypt. Some journalists predictably launched into full “gotcha” mode, accusing the United States of hypocrisy for not immediately denouncing the coup.

There was even a smattering of sympathy for the Muslim Brotherhood. Bloomberg News described its radicalization as a result of years of oppression, and the BBC did a sob story on how “deeply religious” many of its members are.

Oh, grow up.

Not all coups are equal, not all democracies are democratic. And “deeply religious” is not a virtue when secularists and other religions are fair game, as they were in Egypt for the last year.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here. 





headline: Obama White House falsely blames Ambassador Patterson for Morsi mess
byline: By Robert O'Brien, Robert O’Brien


In Josh Rogin’s and Eli Lake’s Daily Beast column this week, current and former “Obama administration officials” anonymously attempt to shift blame for President Obama’s failed engagement with Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood to career foreign service officer and current U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Anne Patterson.

While such spin from the White House and its political allies is not surprising given America’s rudderless Middle-East policy, the Obama administration’s latest effort is both a red herring and disrespectful to one of our nation’s finest diplomats.

I personally saw Ambassador Patterson’s commitment to U.S. national security policy at the UN where she served as a deputy and acting Chief of Mission during the Bush administration.

It was President Obama’s demand that Patterson engage the Muslim Brotherhood. For administration staffers to now suggest that it was Patterson’s policy is ridiculous.

Patterson was relentless in standing up to America’s adversaries at Turtle Bay and took on anyone who stood in the way of America’s priorities. 

Such conduct was to be expected from Patterson, who had previously been America’s Ambassador to Columbia, during which time she was under constant threat from drug lords and leftist guerrillas.

In subsequent assignments, Patterson served as Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement, where she ran America’s efforts to eradicate Afghanistan’s poppy plantations and cut off the Taliban’s narco-profits, and as Ambassador to Pakistan, during the past several years where a fragile Pakistan also changed leadership.

Patterson is no neophyte. She certainly understands that it is not in America’s interest to have an Islamist party in charge of Egypt. 

I am sure she would have been happier if Washington had done more to support the secularists, moderate Muslims and Christians in Egypt, who longed for a rule-of-law based society after the fall of US ally Hosni Mubarak.But that was not the administration’s policy in Egypt or in the region.

When the Green Revolution was unfolding on the streets of Tehran, there was silence from the White House and the Mullahs’ tightened their grip in Iran.

When the moderate opposition to Assad was desperate for our support in Syria, little was forthcoming from this Administration. Moderates were sidelined there as they were in Egypt. 

Once the Muslim Brotherhood gained power in Cairo, Patterson, as the implementer of the White House’s foreign policy had to deal with that reality.

The U.S. ambassador is the president’s representative in a foreign land. It is the president’s policy that our ambassadors implement.

It was President Obama’s demand that Patterson engage the Muslim Brotherhood. For administration staffers to now suggest that it was Patterson’s policy is ridiculous.

No one should be surprised by the course this administration chose. Then-Senator Obama made it clear in his 2008 debate clash with Hillary Clinton that he believes America "has to talk to its enemies." Indeed, at the same time that the administration was engaging the Muslim Brotherhood in Cairo, it was setting up peace talks with the Taliban in Qatar, to the apparent chagrin of our ally President Hamid Karzai in Kabul.

Now that a large swath of the Egyptian people, backed by the Army, has removed President Morsi and the Muslim Brothers from office, unnamed administration officials believe that the Arkansas-born Patterson, who has excelled under presidents from both political parties and is respected on both sides of the aisle, should be the scapegoat. That cannot be allowed to happen.





headline: The ObamaCare spin machine revs up
byline: By Karl Rove


There's been a recent flurry of activities attempting to boost the Affordable Care Act. In mid-June, for example, President Obama's "Organizing for Action" group reportedly spent seven figures on TV ads (in California, Florida and Texas) claiming, "Americans are already seeing the benefits" of health-care reform.

Also in June, the administration and an allied nonprofit, Enroll America, described how hundreds of thousands of community organizers will sign up seven million uninsured people for health coverage, once registration for subsidized insurance starts Oct. 1.

Then on July 2, the administration dropped a bombshell, delaying the employer mandate for a year.

Team Obama works hard to limit the political damage of the health law in the 2014 elections.

Even Democrats were taken aback. Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin, one of the law's authors, was quoted in the New York Times saying, "This was the law. How can they change the law?" But the rule of law won't stop this White House from trying to reduce the damage from ObamaCare until after the 2014 midterm elections.

To continue reading Mr. Rove's column in the Wall Street Journal, click here.





Karl Rove is a Fox News political analyst and a former senior adviser and deputy chief of staff to President George W. Bush. He is the author of "Courage and Consequence: My Life as a Conservative in the Fight" (Threshold Editions, 2010) and helped organize the political action committee American Crossroads.



headline: If Obama had been president in 1776, American independence would have died waiting
byline: By Michael Goodwin


The brilliant author and journalist Midge Decter coined a line to live by. “You’ve got to join the side you’re on,” she has said. On the anniversary of American independence, all of us, especially our president, would do well to follow her advice.

Decter’s observation, which grew out of her disillusionment with modern liberalism, is relevant in our era of spreading global disorder. History is unfolding in rapid fashion in the volatile Mideast, yet the only consistency in American policy is hesitation, followed by vacillation.

From Afghanistan to Iran to Egypt to Libya to Syria and now back to Egypt again, President Obama has resembled a weather vane. Over and over again, he waits to see which way the wind is blowing, then races to get ahead of the storm.

When it changes direction, he does, too. If he had been top dog in Philadelphia in the summer of 1776, American independence would have died waiting.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post.com, click here.





headline: Morsi's ouster leaves Americans asking if US still supports democracy
byline: By Peter Morici


President Obama needs to level with the American public now that Mohammed Morsi has been ousted in Egypt. His support for mob demands in Cairo and the military’s removal of a duly elected government calls into question his commitment to foreign democracies that elect governments whose policies he does not like.

Mr. Obama is bound by his own words, international law and the expectations of allies, such as Great Britain, not to acknowledge or support coups that overthrow duly-elected governments.

For the president, it is an inconvenient truth that Morsi, a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, accomplished his office through the ballot box and was as constitutionally legitimate as Obama, but for one small fact.

Americans are entitled to know: What is the U.S. policy toward overthrowing democratically elected governments?

Morsi pushed through constitutional changes that are rather favorable to the fundamentalist thinking of the Brotherhood. Of course, those views about the desired progress of society and place of religion in the equation are hardly simpatico with the left leaning ideas on Harvard Yard and other American temples of the “progressive” movement.

Like most Americans, I have no truck with the ideas of the Brotherhood, but the mob in the streets objecting to Morsi chose methods other than ballots to remove him.

Sadly for him, the Egyptian military is neither under civilian control nor primarily financed by the Egyptian government. The former gets its manna from the Obama Administration via more than $1 billion annually in U.S. military aid.

Now, the new government, in a fit of liberal tolerance is jailing Brotherhood leaders. And it would seem democracy is accomplishing more progress in U.S. sanctioned Iran than American supported Egypt.

During its recent perils, the Obama White House did not support the elected Egyptian government. It stated the Morsi government must respect the will of all the people, much as the U.S. president did pushing through ObamaCare despite the disapproval of the majority of Americans, as expressed through town meetings, polls and a Massachusetts Senate election.

Instead, the U.S. president gave a wink and a nod to a military takeover in Egypt, which the State Department is now indicating may not be a coup, because the generals have not imposed a military leader. Instead, they have put in place as president Egypt’s highest judge, after he was in office but two days. Even if a figurehead, that makes the military removal of a duly-elected Egypt president not a coup, therefore legitimate?

That question has the legal minds at the State Department working overtime.

The upshot, in Egypt Obama’s principal representative, Ambassador Anne Paterson, is vilified by all sides, and the Muslim Brotherhood is likely permanently disabused of the notion that participating in democratic processes can lead to its views taking hold anywhere from Syria to Yemen.

This is a mighty grand mess that will result in untold bloodshed and further reinforce anti-American views across the Middle East. Now, the Arab Spring could easily become pan-Arab anarchy, and much blood will be on American hands. Only a fool would think this situation would not inspire new terrorists.

Those remarkable accomplishments notwithstanding, Americans are entitled to know: What is the U.S. policy toward overthrowing democratically elected governments? Is it unacceptable except when it gives rise to fundamentalist social and religious views the prelates within the American academy and mainstream media don’t like?

Who says America doesn’t have an insular aristocracy and Ayatollahs of its own?





headline: Egypt's lessons for America
byline: By Peter Morici


The tragedy in Egypt is a warning to Americans—imperious executive power is a threat to liberty everywhere.

In much of the Middle East, citizens are sharply divided between advocates of modernism and those who embrace strict interpretations of Islam and favor a theocratic order; western political leaders seem unable to grasp several fundamental realities.

Other than the oil-exporting states, Arab nations have little to sell the world.

Notably, Egypt can’t compete with Asia in manufacturing and its universities simply don’t produce enough good engineers to compete in high-tech and services.Liberal democracies, without persistent Western aid, can’t deliver the prosperity and opportunities for young people necessary to ensure political stability.

ObamaCare is not of the consequence of Morsi’s constitutional plans for Egypt, however, consider the sins against democracy that have followed from it.

Many Arabs either don’t grasp or care that a theocratic order sentences them to an impoverished medieval existence.

To become president, Mohammed Morsi, a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, defeated the prime minister of deposed Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak's government by a slim margin of 51.7. to 48.3 percent—not much different than Obama’s electoral margins and granting as much mandate to act.

Frustrated by a divided legislature and unsympathetic courts, Morsi sought to ignore the former and assert supremacy over the latter and govern through executive order. That’s foul in most westerners’ book until one examines Obama’s record.

Declaring “elections have consequences,” he sought federal command and control over one-sixth of the U.S. economy—health care. When he lacked public support—as expressed in polls, town meetings and a Massachusetts special Senate election—and could not muster enough support in the Senate, he dragooned a bill through Congress by legislative slight of hand.

When faced with the fact that ObamaCare’s fine on citizens for not purchasing health insurance might not be unconstitutional, he publically sought to intimidate the chief justice of the Supreme Court at his State of the Union address.

Reading the contorted language and maddening reasoning of the Justice’s decision upholding the law, it is clear Obama managed to put himself above both the legislature and the courts, even if with better optics than did Morsi.

Surely, ObamaCare is not of the consequence of Morsi’s constitutional plans for Egypt, however, consider the sins against democracy that have followed.

Through lieutenants, such as assistant Senate Majority Leader Dick Durbin and the head of the IRS workers union, he has used the IRS to target Americans for persecution and ruin who participate in conservative civic groups.

Through the Justice Department, he has rifled the phone records and emails of Associated Press reporters and a Fox News correspondent.

His National Security Agency has grasped such sweeping surveillance power through secret courts that even European governments are screaming about his hubris and overreach.

Obama can’t get through Congress unneeded and expensive curbs on CO2 emissions—new technologies and market forces are already driving those down quickly—so he is seizing control of the activities of electric utilities through executive orders.

Slowly and insidiously these actions intimidate critics, marginalize Congress and the courts, and ensure political victories for American “progressives” over the luddites of the right he condescendingly characterizes as clinging to guns and bibles.

These parallels between Egypt and America are only dismissed at the peril of liberty.

Americans have always had free press and free association to lay bare the pious agendas of self-appointed prophets.

But now the powers abused by an unaccountable IRS, insular Justice Department and stealth NSA to serve a president convinced of the perfection of his ideas is as much a threat to liberty as any religious zealot in Cairo.





headline: It's time to retire the N-word -- for everyone
byline: By Jehmu Greene


"You're pronouncing it wrong. It's not nigger, it's nigga," my friend said. I had just moved to Washington, D.C. -- "Chocolate City" as it's known among the capital city's predominantly black population.

A child of Liberian immigrants who was usually the only black girl in my classes, I grew up in predominantly white Austin, Texas. After moving to D.C., I realized that knowing all the words to every George Strait song wasn't going to help me assimilate into black culture. Supposedly, I needed to know how to talk "black.”

Twenty years later, the Food Network fires Paula Deen for using the same word I practiced saying with a friend in order to have street credibility. Why is it a given that if you are a high-profile white person and say “nigger,” you are demonized, yet if you are a high-profile black person who uses “nigga” in the lyrical fruits of your labor, you are most likely paid substantially for glorifying it?

Certainly, admonishing white people who use the N-word can’t be our most visible weapon to fight racism.

In the weeks since Paula Deen’s admission to saying “nigger” became public, the N-word has been dissected and hotly debated in the media. Contrary to Prof. Marc Lamont Hill’s belief that "there are just some things white people cannot say," a double standard by any other name is still the same.

Are there any things that black people cannot say or does the legacy of slavery give us carte blanche to unapologetically use dehumanizing language? Even the lasting impact of lynchings and segregation and the present day reality of institutional racism and racial profiling should not provide cover for blacks to use hate speech.

Renowned black studies professors, cultural anthropologists, historians and entertainers poignantly describe how blacks have reclaimed, reshaped and refashioned “nigger.” Like we put on a pair of “nigga” Spanks to help even out the legacy lumps of slavery. Though there is a certain logic to that, as hip-hop historian Davey D writes, "We can't possibly believe that we have the power to change the meaning of the word and expect other people to follow along with this mentality.”

Giving blacks permission to use "nigger" in any form is a slap in the face to our ancestors and living elders who don't have to read a history book to recall the pain inflicted by the word.

“Nigga” champions also conveniently forget that rap music is a global phenomenon and this language represents African-American culture to the world.

Advocates of African-Americans’ innate right to use what many of them describe as the “most offensive word on the planet,” want us to accept that there should be one set of rules for one racial group and another set of rules for another. In other words, an updated version of the outdated and un-American, “separate but equal.”

Many African-Americans never say “nigga.” My parents and their peers don't. Certainly, President Obama and Mrs. Obama would not accept it if one of their daughters referred to the other as “my nigga."

But it sends a message when our president touts his love of Jay-Z’s music without, as James Baldwin once wrote, also publicly using “the great prestige of his office as the moral forum which it can be” to ask his friend to aim higher. All the public has seen is the president quoting Jay-Z’s more suitable lyrics and touting his friendship with the author of "Niggas in Paris."

Carefully parsing out acceptable lyrics for political appeal highlights the stark reality that it is nearly impossible to listen to rap songs without hearing a hailstorm of “niggas,” in addition to revolting misogynistic lyrics (a topic for another day).

Why do these prolific and prophetic poets, who can write such eloquent rhymes, limit themselves to shameful and self-degrading language?

Jay-Z told Oprah that his generation “took the power out of the word.” Don’t believe the hype.

The idea that “nigger” is powerless is a somewhat nonsensical sentiment oft repeated by those who make their living slinging it. If the N-word is truly powerless then why do rappers use it to refer to their adversaries or why can’t white people use it?

My distaste for Paula Deen’s brand began way before this recent scandal. Coaching her fans not to worry about adding more butter and sugar, while hiding a diabetes diagnosis until she could land a lucrative endorsement deal with a pharmaceutical company is daring karma for a well-deserved comeuppance.

However, casually dismissing one of her multitude of excuses that she hears “nigga” being used by her employees in her kitchen only helps exacerbate racial tension. When African-American usage of “nigga” saturates music, social media and everyday conversations, is it hard to imagine why it would so easily roll off the tongues of non-black folk?

Target ended its relationship with Deen, yet their aisles are still lined with hundreds of songs that proudly barrage listeners with “nigger” this, “nigga” that.

On the other hand, Walmart doesn't sell music with explicit lyrics. But if the record label edits the album, Walmart will gladly put it on their shelves. Edited or not, when kids repeat these lyrics they know exactly what to fill in.

Unquestionably, African-Americans aren’t the only consumers of rap music. They aren't even the majority consumers of rap music. Consequently, record labels spend millions of dollars promoting albums that gratuitously use the N-word to white, Latino and Asian audiences and are duly rewarded with sales.

Similarly, retailers make gobs of money selling albums that use the N-word.

Paula Deen was crucified on Twitter. Should the same focus be applied to the relentless corporate promotion and distribution of racially inflammatory language?

Where is the outrage directed toward Target, Apple, Jimmy Iovine, or L.A. Reid? As chairmen of Interscope Records, Iovine is probably the one man who has profited the most from taking "nigger" mainstream.

His peer at Def Jam Records, Reid boasted that Nas titling his album, Nigga was “smart.”

Instead of Paula Deening two ultimate purveyors of hate speech, "American Idol" and "X Factor" gave them jobs.

Did Home Depot, QVC, Novo Nordisk, Caesars Entertainment, Smithfield Foods, and Sears fire Deen for creating a hostile work environment, dreaming of slave plantation weddings, or utterly failing at crisis management? Doubtful. They ran as fast as they could away from the N-word, yet record companies and their distributors get a pass.

There is no question that racism is alive, well and thriving in America. Similarly, there is no question that two generations of Americans have been raised listening to music that bombards them with “nigga.”

Jay-Z and Nas are far from the worst offenders. But even if they have nothing but the best culture-changing intentions, what about the popular performers following in their footsteps?

Chris Brown and his nemesis, Drake, seemingly have no uplifting intentions behind the battery of "niggas" they throw at their fans or each other.

Countless numbers of whites, Latinos and Asians have said, shouted and sung the N-word not once, but multiple times. Should they all be suspended from school or lose their job for regurgitating the language of their idols? For repeating language that was mass marketed to them?

Our current relationship with the N-word is untenable. A cosmetic change in the spelling and pronunciation hinders attempts to relieve racial tension in America.

Where do we go from here? Do we forgive whites for using it or punish everyone who does, including African-Americans?

Certainly, admonishing white people who use the N-word can’t be our most visible weapon to fight racism. Especially since the hypocrisy is too crystal clear and resurrects the very walls we are trying to tear down (see Paula Deen book sales).

I do not believe Paula Deen is a racist. Advocates who give blacks permission to use “nigga,” yet are the first responders in labeling white people who use it as evil and diabolical fail to see the unintended consequences of their actions. Like how some people will keep trying desperately to find a word that is its equivalent, so they, too, can shackle so-called reverse racists (a foolish term).

I’ve experienced this first-hand. After calling Tucker Carlson a “white boy,” conservatives were quick to label me a racist. Would it have mattered to them had they known that Tucker referred to himself as a “white boy” at our first meeting in a green room? No. As far as they were concerned, Jehmu is a racist.

It positively wouldn’t have had any impact on them that I grew up speaking “Texan,” and “white boy” is quite common in conversation down there in them parts.

The #TCOT army would have dismissed the fact that the men I have chosen to love have predominantly been “white boys.” All that mattered is that Jehmu said “white boy” so she is a racist. Labeling someone a racist is becoming as American as apple pie.

Of course, most words have multiple meanings and context absolutely matters, but the varying intentions behind the N-word aren’t limited to the color of the speaker’s skin. Proponents and sympathizers need to stop trying to have it both ways.

Yes, African-Americans may call their friends "nigga" as a term of endearment, but they also use it to demean each other and not just with a lyrical takedown of an archenemy in a rap song.

Educated and wealthy African-Americans often use it behind closed doors to distinguish themselves from the less fortunate.

Several years ago, I was on "The O’Reilly Factor" debating Professor Hill about the use of the N-word in the black community. I was adamant that we shouldn’t keep coming up with excuses to use it and lamented the fact that Elisabeth Hasselbeck was more offended by the word than Whoopi Goldberg and Sherri Shepherd.

Right after leaving the studio, a black man rudely addressed me on the street. Without thinking, I uttered to my girlfriend walking beside me, “stupid nigga." My schooling on how to talk black was now complete.

The 25 times the N-word is spelled out in this piece left me feeling sick to my stomach, not empowered.

I was blessed to have witnessed the first black president in my lifetime. I hope it will be even more thrilling to see a woman do the same in 2016.

Words have life spans. Just imagine if we all did our part to use language that truly lifts us up as members of the human race, perhaps we can celebrate another important benchmark in our lifetime as well: The day the N-word became obsolete.





headline: How liberal anti-gun activists view the American Constitution
byline: By Theodore Bromund


Last month, the House of Representatives unanimously adopted an amendment to the 2014 National Defense Authorization Act to prohibit funding for the implementation of the U.N. Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) for one year.

The Obama administration says it will sign the ATT soon.

The House amendment was vigorously opposed by a group of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) led by Oxfam America, and including Amnesty International, the Arms Control Association, and the National Association of Evangelicals.

The idea that barring the expenditure of funds to implement an unsigned and unratified treaty somehow violates the president’s constitutional authority is truly bizarre.

Obviously, the NGOs’ lobbying was ineffective. But that won’t keep them from continuing to try to shape the interpretation and the implementation of the treaty, which is a creature of their own making, in ways that seek to impinge on U.S. sovereignty.

And now, the U.N. wants to pay NGOs around the world to keep up their efforts, which include this ongoing and misguided effort to make the treaty trump U.S. law.

The amendment that so angered the NGOs was offered by Rep. Mike Kelly (R-Penn.). And their arguments against it were odd indeed. In an email to lawmakers (see below), the groups claimed the Kelly Amendment would “infringe on the commander-in-chief authority of the president.”



This is an odd and revealing – not to mention completely wrong – reading of the U.S. Constitution. The president has inherent powers as commander-in-chief, but control of the purse strings is not one of them. That authority resides in Congress.

Moreover, the U.S. hasn’t even signed the ATT yet. After it does, the Senate would have to ratify the treaty. The idea that barring the expenditure of funds to implement an unsigned and unratified treaty somehow violates the president’s Constitutional authority is truly bizarre.

The NGO argument contained further oddities.They claimed that the Kelly Amendment “could require the Pentagon to no longer implement the rigorous export control system it currently employs.”

Wrong again: while the Amendment was about the Defense Department’s budget, it’s actually the State Department that controls the U.S.’s export control system.

But leave aside the incorrect implication that the Pentagon runs the U.S. system. The NGOs are asserting that even though the U.S. has not signed anything yet, its entire arms export control system and the ATT are already legally inseparable and beyond Congressional control. To ban funding for the treaty is, according to the NGOs, to drop the entire U.S. export control system.

This is an amazing claim.

The NGOs assert that “maintaining a strong export control system is, in fact, ‘implementing’ the Treaty” and thus that the system the U.S. “currently employs” is mandated by the treaty. It would therefore seem that, according to the NGOs, the ATT already profoundly limits the freedom of the U.S. to run and reform its own export control system.

But according to the NGOs, the ATT does more than control and freeze the U.S. export control system. The NGOs believe it compels the U.S. to alter its foreign aid programs. As they put it, because other nations may sign and implement the ATT, “Pentagon programs and projects [against arms trafficking] . . . will be required to adapt to this new reality.”

This is a strange “new reality” indeed. An unsigned and unratified treaty cannot “require” the U.S. to do anything. It certainly cannot change programs that exist to pursue objectives approved by Congress. Moreover, these programs have no connection to the U.S. implementation of the ATT, which was the subject of the Kelly Amendment.

The Pentagon does not conduct its activities “pursuant” to the ATT or “in accordance with and in furtherance of these global standards.” It conducts them pursuant to U.S. policy, as directed and funded by Congress. If Congress wants to enact a bill that would explicitly violate the terms of the ATT, it may do so. Such a bill would prevail over the ATT as a matter of domestic law.

Throughout their email, the NGOs completely fail to distinguish between the ATT and the authority of Congress: as they see it, everything the U.S. does in the realm of arms export control is already regulated by the ATT.

In fact, that’s the NGO strategy: Set up the ATT as the controlling moral and legal authority for U.S. policy, then slowly reinterpret the ATT to drag U.S. policy into alignment with their preferences.

It’s hard to think of a more blatant demonstration of the fact that the most vociferous supporters of this treaty see it as a way to constrain the U.S.

Moreover, the U.N. is in on the NGO game too. It recently announced a “Trust Facility” that will “support all aspects of the Arms Trade Treaty’s implementation, including small arms and ammunition controls.” To that end, the Facility will fund NGOs—not to mention institutions such as universities— so they can provide “legal or legislative assistance” to promote ratification of the treaty by “as many countries as possible.”

In other words, the U.N. will fund NGO lobbying for the ATT here, there and everywhere, no matter how erroneous, misguided and counter to U.S. sovereignty their activities may be.

The U.N. has no business doing this. The Trust Facility is further evidence that the U.N. is far too cozy with the NGOs. The only consolation is that, if the success of last month’s NGO lobbying effort is any evidence, the U.N. is backing the losers.





headline: The Zimmerman trial is already over
byline: By John Lott


Prosecutors in the George Zimmerman second degree murder trial have pushed hard on two points as they seek to make their case against him: that the injuries to Zimmerman on the night Trayvon Martin died were “insignificant” and that he had studied Florida’s “Stand Your Ground” law in a college class in 2010.

To win conviction on second-degree murder, the prosecution has to show that the death was caused by a criminal act “demonstrating a depraved mind without regard for human life.” 

That’s why the prosecutor keeps pushing the claim that Zimmerman profiled Martin because he was black. Meanwhile, the lesser charge of manslaughter generally is a crime committed in the heat of passion, where there is no premeditation. The jury would have to believe Zimmerman lost his temper in shooting Martin.

This is a case that prosecutors should never have brought but they let politics influence their decision.

People can use force to protect themselves when they reasonably believe it is “necessary to prevent imminent death or great bodily harm to themselves.” On this score, the testimony of the Jacksonville medical examiner, Valerie Rao, that Zimmerman injuries were “insignificant” is largely irrelevant. 

A broken nose, a head being slammed into cement, and punches to the face may not have left Zimmerman incapacitated. The important question is whether such an attack with a man on top of him would leave Zimmerman to “reasonably believe” that there was a threat of “imminent death or great bodily harm to himself.”

Much was also made of the class Zimmerman took class at Seminole State College taught by Professor Alexis Carter. The key supposedly was that Zimmerman really did understand Florida’s “Stand Your Ground” law. Prosecutor Richard Mantei told the court that Zimmerman's legal studies would help jurors understand his "state of mind" and "ambitions and frustrations" before the shooting.

Some pundits, such as Fox News’ Bob Beckel, bought the claim: “I think that the prosecution got back in the case today for a very simple reason: this professor made it very clear that Zimmerman knew everything about the ‘Stand Your Ground’ law and in that ‘Stand Your Ground,’ according to the professor, there are reasons that you could use your gun if necessary but this was not an extreme enough case to do that. I think that the prosecution is back in it, back in it strong.”

One can debate about whether Zimmerman remembered the part of that lecture from the class. Nevertheless, it is really beside the point because whether Zimmerman’s actions were legal has nothing to do with the “Stand Your Ground” law. 

Prior to “Stand Your Ground,” citizens who wanted to defend themselves from a criminal had to retreat as far as possible and then announce to the criminal that they were going to shoot. The “Stand Your Ground” law simply replaced the original requirement to retreat to a “reasonable person’s” standard, instead stating that lethal force is justified when a reasonable person would believe that a criminal intends to inflict serious bodily harm or death.

But Zimmerman’s defense has never raised the “Stand Your Ground” law for one simple reason: with Zimmerman on his back and Trayvon Martin holding him down, he had no option to retreat.

None of the testimony ever explained why the “Stand Your Ground” law was even relevant to Zimmerman’s actions. How Beckel comes away with the notion all this means that Zimmerman didn’t have “an extreme enough case” to defend himself is hardly obvious.

Prosecutors’ problem is that they have to do more than eventually convince people that their version of events is “likely,” and they haven’t come close to doing that. Instead, they have to show that they are true beyond a “reasonable doubt.” To put it differently, to say something is “likely” just means that there is over a 50 percent chance it is true. To say something is beyond a reasonable doubt means that it is much closer to 100 percent.

The tragic thing about the case is how many people jumped to conclusions before they knew the facts. Many conservative commentators claimed early on that Zimmerman had acted improperly (Mona Charen, Rich Lowry, Heather Mac Donald, Robert VerBruggen, and Gregory Kane). 

Comments by President Obama, Al Sharpton, and others surely stirred up the racial aspects of the case and appear to have generated many cases across the country where blacks attacked whites to avenge Trayvon Martin (e.g.,Gainesville, Florida; Oak Park, Illinois; Mobile, Alabama; Toledo, Ohio; Grand Rapids, Michigan; and Norfolk, Virginia).

It is a case that prosecutors should never have brought, but they let politics influence their decision.

Next, it will be the defense’s turn to present their case. But, for all practical purposes, the Zimmerman trial is already over.





headline: On this Fourth of July, Thomas Jefferson is weeping
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


Do you have more personal liberty today than on the Fourth of July 2012?

When Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence, he used language that has become iconic.

He wrote that we are endowed by our Creator with certain inalienable rights, and among them are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

Not only did he write those words, but the first Congress adopted them unanimously, and they are still the law of the land today.

By acknowledging that our rights are inalienable, Jefferson’s words and the first federal statute recognize that our rights come from our humanity -- from within us -- and not from the government.

Today we have a government that alone decides how much wealth we can retain, how much free expression we can exercise, how much privacy we can enjoy.

The government the Framers gave us was not one that had the power and ability to decide how much freedom each of us should have, but rather one in which we individually and then collectively decided how much power the government should have. That, of course, is also recognized in the Declaration, wherein Jefferson wrote that the government derives its powers from the consent of the governed.

To what governmental powers may the governed morally consent in a free society? We can consent to the powers necessary to protect us from force and fraud, and to the means of revenue to pay for a government to exercise those powers. But no one can consent to the diminution of anyone else’s natural rights, because, as Jefferson wrote and the Congress enacted, they are inalienable.

Just as I cannot morally consent to give the government the power to take your freedom of speech or travel or privacy, you cannot consent to give the government the power to take mine.

This is the principle of the natural law: We all have areas of human behavior in which each of us is sovereign and for the exercise of which we do not need the government’s permission. Those areas are immune from government interference.

That is at least the theory of the Declaration of Independence, and that is the basis for our 237-year-old American experiment in limited government, and it is the system to which everyone who works for the government today pledges fidelity.

Regrettably, today we have the opposite of what the Framers gave us. Today we have a government that alone decides how much wealth we can retain, how much free expression we can exercise, how much privacy we can enjoy. And since the Fourth of July 2012, freedom has been diminished.

In the past year, all branches of the federal government have combined to diminish personal freedoms, in obvious and in subtle ways.

In the case of privacy, we now know that the federal government has the ability to read all of our texts and emails and listen to all of our telephone calls -- mobile and landline -- and can do so without complying with the Constitution’s requirements for a search warrant.

We now know that President Obama authorized this, federal judges signed off on this, and select members of Congress knew of this, but all were sworn to secrecy, and so none could discuss it. And we only learned of this because a young former spy risked his life, liberty and property to reveal it.

In the past year, Obama admitted that he ordered the CIA in Virginia to use a drone to kill two Americans in Yemen, one of whom was a 16-year-old boy. He did so because the boy’s father, who was with him at the time of the murders, was encouraging militants to wage war against the U.S.

He wasn’t waging war, according to the president; he was encouraging it.

Simultaneously with this, the president claimed he can use a drone to kill whomever he wants, so long as the person is posing an active threat to the U.S., is difficult to arrest and fits within guidelines that the president himself has secretly written to govern himself.

In the past year, the Supreme Court has ruled that if you are in police custody and fail to assert your right to remain silent, the police at the time of trial can ask the jury to infer that you are guilty. This may seem like a technical ruling about who can say what to whom in a courtroom, but it is in truth a radical break from the past.

Everyone knows that we all have the natural and constitutionally guaranteed right to silence. And anyone in the legal community knows that judges for generations have told jurors that they may construe nothing with respect to guilt or innocence from the exercise of that right.

No longer. Today, you remain silent at your peril.

In the past year, the same Supreme Court has ruled that not only can you be punished for silence, but you can literally be forced to open your mouth. The court held that upon arrest -- not conviction, but arrest -- the police can force you to open your mouth so they can swab the inside of it and gather DNA material from you.

Put aside the legal truism that an arrest is evidence of nothing and can and does come about for flimsy reasons; DNA is the gateway to personal data about us all. Its involuntary extraction has been insulated by the Fourth Amendment’s requirements of relevance and probable cause of crime.

No longer. Today, if you cross the street outside of a crosswalk, get ready to open your mouth for the police.

The litany of the loss of freedom is sad and unconstitutional and irreversible. The government does whatever it can to retain its power, and it continues so long as it can get away with it. It can listen to your phone calls, read your emails, seize your DNA and challenge your silence, all in violation of the Constitution.

Bitterly and ironically, the government Jefferson wrought is proving the accuracy of Jefferson’s prediction that in the long march of history, government grows and liberty shrinks. Somewhere Jefferson is weeping.

Happy Fourth of July 2013.





headline: What the Liberty Bell can teach us about America and the Fourth of July
byline: By Dr. Tamara Cohn Eskenazi, Dr. Jacob Wright


The Liberty Bell is the icon of American independence and freedom. Rung during the first readings of the Declaration of Independence in 1776, it was abolitionists in the 1830s who gave it the name “Liberty Bell.”

Since then it has been displayed at scores of political assemblies, figuring prominently as a symbol of freedom during the Cold War and the protests of the 1960s.

Its conspicuous crack represents for many the divisions within our country that counter the force of freedom.

Yet even though this bell now hangs mute, its likeness on stamps, coins, and countless trademarks ensures that the message engraved on its crown still resounds: "Proclaim liberty throughout the land unto all the inhabitants thereof.”

Many may be surprised to learn that these stirring words are a quotation from the Old Testament/Hebrew Bible book of Leviticus.

The verse quoted on the Liberty Bell emphasizes the collective nature of liberty. It is to be proclaimed to all the land’s inhabitants.

For contemporary readers of the Bible, Leviticus is often thought to be an archaic collection of laws, rituals, and restrictions.

Yet this book contains some of the most quoted biblical teachings, like “Love your neighbor as yourself,” or “love the stranger, for you were strangers in Egypt.”

As in the instructions to love neighbor and stranger, the biblical writers have a very concrete understanding of liberty, and they articulate this understanding in their social and economic guidelines.

The surrounding verses in Leviticus consist of regulations pertaining to the liberation of indentured servants, assistance for financially imperiled fellow citizens, rules on taking interest, return of property to its original owner, and even treatment of the soil.

Here, as elsewhere in Leviticus, detailed instructions culminate in general moral principles, such as: “Do not wrong one another, but fear the Lord your God.” Long life and security in the Promised Land, the biblical authors insist, require adherence to these guidelines.

The circles that produced the Bible recognized that their communities couldn’t contend with the military superpowers of their day. Hence they focused their efforts on creating a sense of belonging and solidarity—of what we might call “peoplehood”—that no army could vanquish.

In contrast to Greek thinkers of their time, they set forth a notion of freedom that had little to do with the preservation of political autonomy orliberation from tyranny.

To use a distinction introduced by the philosopher Isaiah Berlin, instead of “negative freedom”—that is, the freedom from external restraint—the biblical authors developed an ideal of freedom grounded in a sustainable social order.

Constraints on political independence prompted the biblical authors to contemplate the reality of social interdependence.Theirconception of liberty emanates from a concern with their people’s survival and wellbeing.

For them freedom means liberating those who have already losttheir means of prosperity.

- It means supporting those who might otherwise slide into irreversible servitude.

- It means regulating business dealings to protect the vulnerable.

- It means preventing land from accumulating in the hands of the few.

- It means also that the land itself be cared for so that it too can regenerate its resources.

The biblical laws both create a social safety net and demand that each to do his and her utmost to assist those in dire straits.

The verse quoted on the Liberty Bell emphasizes the collective nature of liberty. It is to be proclaimed to all the land’s inhabitants.

The statement grows from an insight that we are only as strong as our weakest members, that all must enjoy a piece of the pie if we are to call ourselves a free people.

Similarly,in a pivotal chapter of the book of Jeremiah, the prophet is called to stand in the most public place and warn those who come to celebrate. His message is: Don’t imagine that you can continue to exploit others and still survive as a nation.

The point is clear: a society that fails to care for the socio-economic conditions of its members and does not establish an equitable system of justice cannot endure, let alone be free.

“Someone else’s material needs are my spiritual responsibility,” said Rabbi Israel Salanter in the 19th century. Leviticus takes it even further: My freedom depends on my neighbor’s prosperity. This principle guides the Bible’s primary theme of covenant.

Why are such teachings relevant for us this Fourth of July?

We are at a point in our history when rapid technological, economic, and demographic change surpasses our ability to assess the consequences of this change.

Now more than ever it is imperative that we immerse ourselves in the study of the ancient sources that have shaped our political tradition.

The Bible, no less than ancient Greek sources, can help us as citizens—whether we be religious or secular—to consider more carefully our most cherished political symbols, such as liberty.

In the face of global economic upheaval and environmental catastrophes, public policy research agendas in America and abroad are now shifting their focus from sustainability to resilience, defined as the ability “to help vulnerable people, organizations and systems persist, perhaps even thrive, amid unforeseeable disruptions.

Where sustainability aims to put the world back into balance, resilience looks for ways to manage in an imbalanced world.”

The biblical authors responded to national defeat and disaster by devising sophisticated strategies of resilience. What Leviticus teaches is that resilience—“long life in the land”— is not only closely tied to liberation, but that our longing for independence must be balanced by an awareness of our interdependence.



Dr. Tamara Cohn Eskenazi is Professor of Bible Hebrew Union College – Jewish Institute of Religion.



Dr. Jacob L. Wright is Professor of Hebrew Bible at Emory University.



headline: Buzzed on the Fourth of July -- should the DUI threshold be lowered?
byline: By Dr. Nicholas Kardaras


When we think of Fourth of July, we tend to think of barbeques, fireworks and summer fun. But Fourth of July is also known for one other thing as well: It’s the deadliest weekend of the year for fatal car accidents.

According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)—which has been tracking car crash statistics for a quarter of a century—Fourth of July almost always tops the list as the deadliest weekend on our nation’s highways.

According to NHTSA statistics, 392 people were killed in motor vehicle traffic crashes during the 2010 Fourth of July holiday period (the latest statistics available). Of those fatalities, 39 percent were in crashes that involved at least one driver or motorcycle operator with a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of .08 grams or higher.

If a person is killed by an alcohol-impaired driver, does it really matter if we consider them 'drunk' or 'buzzed'?

But those statistics beg a further question: how many of those accidents involved drivers who had been drinking yet were under the legal threshold of .08 BAC? Indeed, the question that we really need to be asking is should a person with a BAC of .06 or .07 be legally driving?

And a further very significant question: Would lowering the legal threshold to .05 make a difference in the number of lives lost in fatal car crashes every year?

These are the questions currently being hotly debated as a result of the recent recommendation by the National Transportation Safety Board that all states reduce their legal threshold for drunken driving to .05. Much of the debate currently focuses on what we might consider semantic issues of "drunk" versus "buzzed" driving. Should "buzzed" driving be allowed?

Here's what we know: Alcohol — any amount of alcohol — negatively affects the Central Nervous System; this includes impairment of vision, lack of muscular coordination and lengthened reaction time. A new National Highway Transportation and Safety Administration chart shows that a person with .05 BAC experiences "reduced coordination, reduced ability to track moving objects, difficulty steering, (and) reduced response to emergency driving situations."

Most importantly, alcohol also impairs a person's judgment and removes inhibitions.
Put in real terms, a 180-pound man might consume four beers in one hour and have a BAC of .073-legal to drive under today's .08 threshold. A 140-pound woman who has had three glasses of wine in two hours will have a BAC of .063 — also legal to drive under today's standards.

Are we okay with this? Would you want your 21-year-old, 180-pound son getting behind the wheel of a car after he has had four beers in one hour?

It's also important to note that these BAC numbers don't factor in intervening variables, such as how tired a person is or how much they've eaten, both of which affect the impact of the alcohol in a person's system.

As a clinician and academic who specializes in the treatment of addiction, and as the Clinical Director of the Dunes, a high-end comprehensive addiction treatment program in East Hampton, New York, I certainly do not advocate a draconian zero-tolerance approach to alcohol and substance use--for people who don't have a drinking or drugging problem; if a person does indeed have a substance problem, then abstinence via recovery and treatment is the prescribed way to go.

Our experience has shown us that public policy can and has affected public health.

We know that when the legal drinking age was raised by federal decree in 1984, highway fatalities were significantly reduced. The NHTSA estimates that over 25,000 lives were saved through 2008 — almost a thousand lives a year.

In the current debate, a study by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety has estimated 7,082 deaths would have been prevented in 2010 if all drivers on the road had blood alcohol content below .08 percent. Those are real lives.

Will lowering the BAC threshold actually affect people's behavior? For those with a drinking problem, probably not. But for the recreational drinker — who might plan their evening around a limited number of drinks — the answer is yes.

With the current BAC threshold of .08, we are putting even the casual drinker at risk because essentially we are condoning driving when one has drunk alcohol to a point of impairment. When that 180-pound man is on his (legal) fourth beer, not only is his driving ability impaired, but his judgment on whether or not he can drive — or drink more — is also impaired.

Is he "drunk"? Does that matter? If a person is killed by an alcohol impaired driver, does it really matter if we consider them "drunk" or "buzzed"?





headline: The Palestinians, the peace process and the U.N. – it just doesn’t add up
byline: By Daniel S. Mariaschin


Despite efforts to revive the peace process, the Palestinians are once again making their way through the U.N. machinery to demonize, delegitimize and undermine Israel. From the U.N. Human Rights Council, to the World Health Organization, to UNESCO (the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) the Palestinians seem to be returning to their time-worn way of avoiding the opportunity to negotiate. 

Even as the Obama administration, through Secretary of State John Kerry, has revitalized its efforts in the region, the Palestinians continue to press at the world body for the castigation of Israel. Kerry has met with both sides in order to pave a path back to direct negotiations—the vital element for peace to have a chance at succeeding.

The U.S. secretary of state has concluded his fifth trip to the region in four months. Yet while Israel has offered its cooperation with these efforts, for the Palestinians it’s business as usual. They continue to dip into the U.N. tool box for any possible means to forestall going to the negotiating table, notwithstanding reported efforts to dissuade them from internationalizing the conflict. 

Each time the Palestinians use the United Nations to avoid direct negotiations by ratcheting up pressure on Israel, it’s a direct repudiation of the new effort to get the process moving. Each time they turn to the U.N. to make their case, they’re renouncing any real chance of meaningful peace talks.

On June 19, in a statement that seemed directed at Kerry’s efforts, an advisor for Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas said Fatah “affirmed its rejection of the pressures on Abbas and the leadership.” Those are not the words of willing negotiating partners.

The United Nations has proven to be a handy megaphone for Palestinians to broadcast their distorted worldview of Israel. Why negotiate when you can use various U.N. agencies to make a case for you?

By exploiting the United Nations system instead of sitting down to negotiate with Israel without preconditions, the Palestinians have consistently sought to find aid and comfort with their willing friends in the international community. Bringing complaints and charges against Israel at every turn and in every U.N. venue allows the Palestinians to send a message that they can get their way without sitting down at the table with Israel. As the Palestinians become ever more adept at exploiting the United Nations for their own gain, they move further and further from the prospect of peace.

On Nov. 29, 2012, the United Nations General Assembly voted to grant non-member observer “state” status to the Palestinians. This new designation affords the Palestinians expanded access to the complex U.N. structure to launch complaint after complaint against Israel.

This new status has unleashed Palestinian enthusiasm to go to the U.N. wishing well to get their way. It seems to be working.

The very act of seeking the upgraded status was a clear rejection of all efforts aimed at convincing the Palestinians that real progress can only be made through negotiations between the parties. Israel has long been a victim of systemic abuse at the world body. The Palestinians are once again defying efforts to resolve the conflict by pursuing punitive actions against Israel.

At the World Health Organization assembly in May, Israel was specifically singled out on its agenda, with opprobrium aimed at health conditions in the “occupied” territories. Instead of focusing on such global health issues as influenza control, the World Health Organization capitulated to a political agenda pushed by the Palestinians.

The Palestinians have also made productive use of the U.N. Human Rights Council’s anti-Israel bias. The council already maintains a permanent agenda item aimed at criticizing Israel and the majority of its condemnations—nearly 40 percent—are directed at Israel. Now the council notes that Israel could be tried for war crimes at the International Criminal Court, a U.N. body the Palestinians repeatedly threaten to use against Israel.

The Palestinians have made several attempts to use the World Heritage Committee of UNESCO to deny the historic link of the Jewish people to the land of Israel. In late June at the World Heritage Committee annual session in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, a Palestinian-led effort once again questioned Israel’s bond to Jerusalem. There is no acknowledgment of Israel’s ongoing, successful commitment to ensuring free access to all religions to holy sites in Jerusalem.

The Palestinians, as usual, are speaking in two languages. While they sit with Kerry, who is seeking a two-state solution, they exploit the U.N. system to avoid talking to Israel and to avoid taking concrete steps to bring about peace.

The new peace initiative is presumed to be based on confidence building measures. But recent Palestinian actions at the U.N. don’t inspire any confidence that they are committed to a real and lasting peace. 





headline: If Obama had been president in 1776, American independence would have died waiting
byline: By Michael Goodwin


The brilliant author and journalist Midge Decter coined a line to live by. “You’ve got to join the side you’re on,” she has said. On the anniversary of American independence, all of us, especially our president, would do well to follow her advice.

Decter’s observation, which grew out of her disillusionment with modern liberalism, is relevant in our era of spreading global disorder. History is unfolding in rapid fashion in the volatile Mideast, yet the only consistency in American policy is hesitation, followed by vacillation.

From Afghanistan to Iran to Egypt to Libya to Syria and now back to Egypt again, President Obama has resembled a weather vane. Over and over again, he waits to see which way the wind is blowing, then races to get ahead of the storm.

When it changes direction, he does, too. If he had been top dog in Philadelphia in the summer of 1776, American independence would have died waiting.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post.com, click here.





headline: Gettysburg's most important lesson
byline: By Rod Gragg


On the afternoon of July 1, 1863 – the first day of fighting at the Battle of Gettysburg – a Northern soldier propped his rifle against a tree and took careful aim at a tall, bearded Southern officer who was leading his troops forward through the woods. 

The Northern soldier was Sergeant Charles H. McConnell of the 24th Michigan Infantry, whose regiment and the Iron Brigade to which it belonged had been forced to retreat from McPherson’s Ridge on the west side of Gettysburg.

As the blue-uniformed troops around him fell back, McConnell paused to fire his last round at the towering officer leading the advancing Southern troops.

“I thank God I did not kill you,” McConnell proclaimed to Lane on the stage at Gettysburg, and the two former enemies warmly shook hands.

His target was a 27-year-old North Carolina farmer-turned-soldier, Lieutenant Colonel John R. Lane, who had taken command of the 26th North Carolina Infantry after its young colonel had been shot down.

The North Carolinians had begun their assault some 45 minutes earlier with 800 troops: now only 212 were standing.

The opposing 24th Michigan had suffered almost equally grievous losses. When Sergeant McConnell fired his last cartridge, he sent a one-ounce lead bullet smashing into the back of Lane’s neck just as the officer turned to rally his troops.

Miraculously, Lane survived. 

In 1903, he was invited to give a speech at Gettysburg on the 40th anniversary of the battle. By then he was a prominent Confederate veteran and a well-known North Carolina livestock dealer. 

As the aging solider prepared to deliver his speech at Gettysburg, he was joined on the stage by an elderly Chicago pharmaceutical executive and Union veteran – Charles McConnell, the Michigan soldier who had shot Lane 40 years earlier. 

An unexpected encounter had brought the two together decades after the war, and they had become close friends.

“I thank God I did not kill you,” McConnell proclaimed to Lane on the stage at Gettysburg, and the two former enemies warmly shook hands.

Nearby, a blue-uniformed band of Northern veterans broke into a rendition of “Dixie” as the crowd wildly cheered Lane’s and McConnell’s exceptional reconciliation.

Of all the lessons to be remembered from the Battle of Gettysburg on its 150th anniversary, one not to be ignored is the remarkable spirit of national reconciliation that followed the Civil War -- embodied by Gettysburg veterans such as McConnell and Lane.

Granted, there are lessons aplenty to be learned from Gettysburg: the disasters that can follow the failure to settle issues peacefully, the horrors and waste of warfare, the tremendous sacrifices rendered to produce the results of that war, as well as important lessons in military strategy and tactics, exceptional lessons in leadership and the inspiration of American valor, both Northern and Southern, as demonstrated on Gettysburg’s fields of fire and fury on July 1-3, 1863.

Some of those lessons can be learned from other battles and other wars, but the reconciliation of the American nation is unique. 

The stunning horror of the Civil War and the ugliness, inequities and oppression of the Reconstruction Era that followed it, made reconciliation exceedingly unlikely. 

Historically, civil wars do not end well. Bitterness, revenge and renewed fighting can continue for decades, even generations, producing national chaos and cultural collapse. 

Not so with our Civil War.

It was followed by a national reconciliation, which was led in no small way by the nation’s veterans – those men in blue and gray who had actually fought each other, including many Gettysburg principals.

President and commander-in-chief Abraham Lincoln set the example for national reconciliation in his second inaugural address, which urged Northerners and Southerners alike to “bind up the nation’s wounds” with “malice toward none; with charity for all.” 

Following Lincoln’s lead, Union General-in-Chief Ulysses S. Grant gave Confederate General Robert E. Lee generous terms at Appomattox, where Lee’s surrender triggered the end of the war. 

The most influential man in the South, Lee refused to allow his army to turn to guerilla warfare, and spent the rest of his life striving to set a personal and public example of reconciliation. 

Also influential was the model of reconciliation set by Brigadier General Joshua Chamberlain, a Union officer who would become almost legendary for his leadership at Gettysburg. 

Given the honor of overseeing the actual surrender of Lee’s army at Appomattox, Chamberlain issued an extraordinary order to the Northern troops under his command. As Lee’s defeated soldiers marched forward to stack their weapons and fold their flags, there were no cheers, no jeers, no jubilation.

Instead, at Chamberlain’s order, the victorious Northern troops saluted their former foes. The startled Southern soldiers responded in kind, and the war that had claimed 620,000 lives thus ended in a mutual salute. 

These key examples of reconciliation were later duplicated by countless old soldiers in blue and gray, who joined each other on the major battlefields of the war in anniversary commemorations that continued far into the 20th century.

There, on former killing fields transformed into parks, they called each other “my friend the enemy,” treated one another with mutual respect, and helped rebuild the nation. 

Rooted in the Judeo-Christian values on which American culture, law and government were founded, this spirit of reconciliation did indeed “bind up the nation’s wounds” to an extraordinary degree.

Today – 150 years after Gettysburg – that spirit of reconciliation remains a lasting lesson for the ages and one that is uniquely American.





headline: Morsi's ouster leaves Americans asking if US still supports democracy
byline: By Peter Morici


President Obama needs to level with the American public now that Mohammed Morsi has been ousted in Egypt. His support for mob demands in Cairo and the military’s removal of a duly elected government calls into question his commitment to foreign democracies that elect governments whose policies he does not like.

Mr. Obama is bound by his own words, international law and the expectations of allies, such as Great Britain, not to acknowledge or support coups that overthrow duly-elected governments.

For the president, it is an inconvenient truth that Morsi, a member of the Muslim Brotherhood, accomplished his office through the ballot box and was as constitutionally legitimate as Obama, but for one small fact.

Americans are entitled to know: What is the U.S. policy toward overthrowing democratically elected governments?

Morsi pushed through constitutional changes that are rather favorable to the fundamentalist thinking of the Brotherhood. Of course, those views about the desired progress of society and place of religion in the equation are hardly simpatico with the left leaning ideas on Harvard Yard and other American temples of the “progressive” movement.

Like most Americans, I have no truck with the ideas of the Brotherhood, but the mob in the streets objecting to Morsi chose methods other than ballots to remove him.

Sadly for him, the Egyptian military is neither under civilian control nor primarily financed by the Egyptian government. The former gets its manna from the Obama Administration via more than $1 billion annually in U.S. military aid.

Now, the new government, in a fit of liberal tolerance is jailing Brotherhood leaders. And it would seem democracy is accomplishing more progress in U.S. sanctioned Iran than American supported Egypt.

During its recent perils, the Obama White House did not support the elected Egyptian government. It stated the Morsi government must respect the will of all the people, much as the U.S. president did pushing through ObamaCare despite the disapproval of the majority of Americans, as expressed through town meetings, polls and a Massachusetts Senate election.

Instead, the U.S. president gave a wink and a nod to a military takeover in Egypt, which the State Department is now indicating may not be a coup, because the generals have not imposed a military leader. Instead, they have put in place as president Egypt’s highest judge, after he was in office but two days. Even if a figurehead, that makes the military removal of a duly-elected Egypt president not a coup, therefore legitimate?

That question has the legal minds at the State Department working overtime.

The upshot, in Egypt Obama’s principal representative, Ambassador Anne Paterson, is vilified by all sides, and the Muslim Brotherhood is likely permanently disabused of the notion that participating in democratic processes can lead to its views taking hold anywhere from Syria to Yemen.

This is a mighty grand mess that will result in untold bloodshed and further reinforce anti-American views across the Middle East. Now, the Arab Spring could easily become pan-Arab anarchy, and much blood will be on American hands. Only a fool would think this situation would not inspire new terrorists.

Those remarkable accomplishments notwithstanding, Americans are entitled to know: What is the U.S. policy toward overthrowing democratically elected governments? Is it unacceptable except when it gives rise to fundamentalist social and religious views the prelates within the American academy and mainstream media don’t like?

Who says America doesn’t have an insular aristocracy and Ayatollahs of its own?





headline: Inside the mind of Aaron Hernandez
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Most of America now knows that Aaron Hernandez, the star tight end of the New England Patriots, who inked a $40 million contract to catch footballs and run fast with them, has been charged with the murder of semi-pro football player Odin Lloyd.

Hernandez is being sued civilly for allegedly shooting a man in the face several months ago (causing the loss of his eye). He is now also being investigated in a 2012 drive-by shooting that left two other men dead in Boston.

It has also been reported that Hernandez was questioned by police in 2007, following the shooting of two men after a University of Florida football game that the Gators lost.

Much has been made of the fact that, when he was 16, Aaron Hernandez suddenly lost his father Dennis, who died of complications from hernia surgery.

I promise you that Aaron, if guilty of the crimes alleged against him, was not born evil; he was born as good as any other kid.

After that, Hernandez supposedly descended into darkness, allegedly keeping company with troublemakers in Bristol, Connecticut and smoking marijuana.

Eventually, he allegedly came to associate with the Bristol Bloods, a notorious street gang known for extraordinary acts of violence, including shootings and slashings.

But the death of one’s father, when one is 16, even out of the blue, even when a young man reveres his dad, does not a gang member make. And complicated grief does not turn people homicidal (if Aaron Hernandez is guilty).

The loss of empathy that allows a man to participate in a drive-by shooting (if that that turns out to be true), to pump a bullet into a man’s eye (if that is true) and to participate in the execution of another man (if that is true), almost always begins before age 16.

Usually, it begins early in childhood. And, so, if the death of Dennis Hernandez impacted Aaron and seemed like it turned him toward darkness, that had to be a kind of “last straw,” not the singular event that would explain it.

If Terri Hernandez, Aaron’s mother, were to sit down to talk with me for 50 minutes, I could guarantee her a roadmap with lots of signposts on the way to the hell now surrounding her son. Because I promise you that Aaron, if guilty of the crimes alleged against him, was not born evil; he was born as good as any other kid. Then, multiple events—not one—made him unable to resonate with the suffering of others (cold-blooded).

And, just so we don’t start writing a story that accepts anything that sounds like a Hallmark card: Some of my questions for Aaron’s mother Terri would relate to whether Aaron’s dad really was such a positive influence on her son.

Terri’s next choice for a husband was Jeffrey Cummings, who reportedly was later imprisoned for slashing her with a knife. She divorced him while he was in prison.

I have never evaluated Aaron Hernandez, but, as a forensic psychiatrist with almost twenty years spent evaluating violent men and women, testifying in their trials and writing their biographies (like,"Inside the Mind of Scott Peterson" and "Inside the Mind of Casey Anthony"), I would wonder whether the recipe for making a disaster of Hernandez’ life might include traumatic events that were deeply troubling to him in childhood.

For example, a bond with his father that might have seemed like a partial solution to those troubling events. The sudden loss of his father. His burying those feelings of loss and helplessness and rage under a haze of marijuana smoke, his seeking to feel more powerful (rather than helpless) by associating with a gang. 

His pumping himself up with the applause of crowds who appreciated and fanned his lack of fear on the gridiron, repeated episodes of head trauma when he was thrown to the ground by defending players (which can cause changes in personality, impulsivity and mood swings) and the addition of a huge dose of narcissism via a $40 million dollar payday, courtesy the New England Patriots.

If that is the recipe for disaster that brings the seemingly inexplicable case of Aaron Hernandez before us, then it isn’t all that unusual, save for Hernandez’ day job and his pay grade, courtesy an industry—the NFL—that could seemingly care less whether its stars are well-balanced or on the edge (witness Kansas City Chief Jovan Belcher and Carolina Panther Rae Carruth and Philadelphia Eagle Michael Vick).

Childhood psychological trauma, feelings of helplessness, drug use, repeated head trauma and exposure to street gangs is the textbook trajectory that leads to spending decades in prison.

To make it even more textbook, I would bet you could add no one (including the New England Patriots) apparently demanding that Hernandez be thoroughly evaluated psychiatrically after a stark sign of possible catastrophic trouble: Being sued civilly for shooting a man in the face.

I’ve met men like Aaron Hernandez plenty of times—occasionally, when someone convinces them to get help in my office before somebody ends up dead. But, usually, I interview them in jail cellsand I always wish I had met them sooner.





headline: Chicago Teachers Union president spews racial hate speech, ignores truth about minority parents
byline: By Juan Williams


As the school year ends one of the year’s most powerful lessons in racial hate speech comes from Chicago Teachers’ Union President Karen Lewis.

“Rich white people,” she proclaimed in a speech two weeks ago, “think they know what’s in the best interest of children of African-Americans and Latinos, no matter what the parents’ income or educational level.”

Lewis’ outburst is her reply to persistent calls for school reforms to improve student performance in Chicago.

The pressure is coming from the political left and right.

It is pure bigotry to say that minority parents are indifferent to their children’s education.

Mayor Rahm Emmanuel is calling for tougher teacher assessments, longer school days and closing schools with shrinking student enrollment. 

He is also a big supporter of charter schools that are achieving better results than the traditional public schools. Charters, with flexibility to get around rigid union rules, held nine of the top ten rankings for all public schools in 2012.

Conservative school reform groups are also backing charter schools and even vouchers to give parents choices outside of the city’s troubled public schools.

The latest statistics show only 63 percent of Chicago public school student graduating in 2013 and that is an increase over recent years. Among the city’s 8th grade students 79 percent are not at reading level. Meanwhile, Lewis’ union has made Chicago’s public school teachers among the highest in the nation at an annual average of $74,839.

But the only school reform Lewis advocates is higher taxes on Chicago’s property owners and she describes it as a tax hike on upper-income whites. She also wants new taxes on all financial transfers as well as a commuter tax, which she concludes will principally impact, once again, the target of her anger, well-to-do whites.

Lewis, a black woman and highly educated Dartmouth graduate, also argued that the city’s white, Jewish mayor, Rahm Emanuel, his aides and the city’s “venture capitalists” are guilty of using “little black and brown children as stage props at one press conference while announcing they want to fire, layoff or lock up their parents at another press conference.”

According to Lewis these “rich white people” are ignoring the real source of poor minority student performance in Chicago’s public schools. She contends the source of school failure is “poverty and racism and inequality that hinders the delivery of an educational product in our school system.”

The problem with Lewis’ argument begins with one big racist lie:

Rich white people are not the only group of people concerned with the poor education being given to poor black and Latino children in Chicago’s public schools.

Her racial attack on “rich white people” dismisses the parents of black and Latino children as unthinking pawns, dolts mysteriously satisfied with the failing educational outcomes achieved by their children.

It is pure bigotry to say that minority parents are indifferent to their children’s education. This argument is a sad reminder of segregationist rhetoric used in the last century to argue against integration as the agenda of “outsiders” because southern “good” blacks know their place.

In Lewis’ argument black and brown parents accept academic failure for their children because they know the reality of high levels of poverty and the parents’ own poor academic background.

How insulting to minority parents. The truth is exactly the opposite.

Minority parents want their children to succeed to get out of poverty and bad neighborhoods.

They may not want to see their neighborhood school closed. But I have yet to meet the parent who does not want to see their child excel in school and use that education to go to college and beyond. And now Lewis is trying to intimidate caring white politicians and businessmen into shutting down any efforts to help those parents.

Lewis’ incendiary racial charges can’t obscure the facts of failure in Chicago schools or excuse the fact that the teachers in Lewis’s union are having a hard time achieving success with Chicago's minority public school students.

And Lewis cannot blame poverty since charter schools with 91 percent of their students are eligible for free or low-cost lunches and 60 percent are racial minorities.

The best that Lewis can do is to play to racial antagonism by lashing out at whites with the good will, political power and financial resources to expose her as the hidden hand behind a system that is crushing young people.

She is the one telling parents to swallow low expectations for their children. She is the one who does not believe that schools exist to educate. She is arguing that the school system’s primary purpose is to give out jobs no matter what happens to students.

Lewis is playing the same brand of racial politics used during the days of segregation to divide Americans and distract attention from injustice. The only difference in her case is that as a black person she thinks she can blind black and Latino Americans by attacking “Rich White People.”





headline: Fear and the George Zimmerman trial
byline: By Dr. Marc Siegel


There has been a lot of discussion in the news media about the fact that the George Zimmerman trial is really a story of white on black (white man with a gun, black victim).

It is generally understood by many analysts that the public fascination with the case is really another manifestation of the racial tension and discord that still remains in this country, much as the O.J. Simpson trial was in reverse (black on white)

I am not discounting this view entirely but I want to present an alternative perspective. Rather than race, I believe our fascination has more to do with the mystery of not knowing exactly what happened and the almost palpable fear of death that we all sense is at the heart of this story. 

We are petrified of losing control, never more so than when it involves the ultimate loss of control, death.

One or both men were afraid for their lives. But who was afraid the most? This is in fact the greatest mystery.

Was it Zimmerman, on the bottom of the scrape, having his head pounded, fearing for his life as he maintains, or was it actually the now forever-silent Martin, fearing for his?

As I wrote in "False Alarm; the Truth About the Epidemic of Fear," fear is a great motivator and it captures our negative imagination; we are petrified of losing control, never more so than when it involves the ultimate loss of control, death.

A gun is walking death, but so is the fear of an unknown stranger pummeling you into submission and then going further.

Which story is true in this case?

We may never know. But there are clues.

The striking photographs of an injured Zimmerman has been used at trial to suggest that he was badly beaten, but I must tell you that they don’t look that way to me nor to Dr. Michael Baden, one the top forensic pathologists in the U.S.

I discussed the photos with Dr. Baden and he agreed that the wounds “appear superficial.”

Earlier in my career I treated hundreds of scrapes and cuts like the ones on the back of George Zimmerman’s head at the Bellevue Hospital Emergency Room.

The scalp is very vascular and bleeds easily, making a cut look worse than it is. The same is true for the nose, and the fact that Zimmerman’s was bloodied doesn’t imply that he was hit hard.

The EMTs’ testimony that Zimmerman was able to answer questions at the scene and was able to stand and walk to the squad car and declined to go to the hospital also go against there having been significant injury.

There appears to be a growing body of evidence that George Zimmerman wasn’t badly hurt by Trayvon Martin, which is not the same thing as saying he wasn’t afraid of him.

Of course, it is also possible that Zimmerman’s fear was racially-tinged and was not in keeping with the actual risk that Martin presented.

If there is to be justice in the George Zimmerman trial then fear must be suppressed and the facts allowed to dominate.

Unfortunately, without Trayvon Martin’s side of the story to help guide the jury, this may never happen. If fear runs rampant there will never be a public consensus even if there is a verdict.





headline: What Hong Kong's Snowden decision tells us
byline: By Christian Whiton


Hong Kong’s decision to let NSA-secrets-leaker Edward Snowden slip away is lamentable but also very telling. It is partially the result of failed U.S. leadership along with a disinclination to get involved in the Obama administration’s unserious handling of secrets.

Cooperation with Washington is crucial for the former British colony and what is essentially the only part of China that has the rule of law. Hong Kong is a financial and media hub, and also has one of the world’s busiest container ports. Preserving the security of such an open society requires working with authorities outside of the city of 7 million, which is now part of China but still retains its colonial legal and political system.

Washington and Hong Kong have had a real partnership on crime and security—at least up to now.

Hong Kong's decision speaks volumes about the Obama administration’s lack of real power in the world and the perception that the U.S. is turning inward.

The FBI has its own legal attaché at the American consulate in Hong Kong and a number of other anti-crime agencies keep staff there. Both governments benefit from this cooperation, which ranges from protecting intellectual property to stopping terrorists.

Many Hong Kongers also realize that the United States is the only county that could seriously protest and raise the political cost of any infringement by Beijing of Hong Kong’s rights. 

The British government, like most others, cares more about good relations with Beijing than the fate of the people it governed for 156 years until 1997. 

Today, only U.S. would plausibly speak up for freedoms that exist in Hong Kong, although the Snowden incident certainly won’t slow the steady deterioration of Washington’s interest in Hong Kong’s liberty.

The Hong Kong government’s press release about Snowden didn’t just contain bad news for Washington; it was scornful. The statement made the almost certainly mendacious claim that the request to apprehend Snowden didn’t meet “relevant legal conditions.” It also parroted Snowden’s comments about U.S. hacking in Hong Kong, for which he has presented no evidence.

It’s possible that the Hong Kong government did not calculate fully how much damage its decision will do to its relationship with Washington and its broader image. While the U.S. won’t cease cooperation, the mood between officials of the two governments will become chillier and less productive.

So why did Hong Kong decide to do this? While Snowden had a popular following in the city, popularity matters relatively little to a government that isn’t really democratic. And the central government in Beijing probably would not have objected to Hong Kong extraditing Snowden to America.China’s spymasters know that Snowden is useless as an asset, having already divulged what he knew.

Hong Kong probably thought letting Snowden slip out to Moscow and points west was a relatively easy way to get rid of a hot potato.

The most interesting part of this calculation is what it says about respect for the United States. 

Clearly, Hong Kong calculated there would be no real price to telling Washington to take a hike. This speaks volumes about the Obama administration’s lack of real power in the world and the perception that the U.S. is turning inward amid what President Obama likes to call “nation building right here at home,” save for the occasional drone strike.

The Hong Kong government probably also saw the Obama administration as a collection of Keystone Cops when it comes to protecting information and prosecuting leakers. Why join up voluntarily?

For example, media reports indicate Snowden is now traveling with Sarah Harrison, who works for WikiLeaks, the anti-American organization that traffics in stolen information. 

The Obama administration could have put the organization out of business by indicting its members after they processed and released tens of thousands of stolen U.S. diplomatic cables and other national security information, putting the careers and even lives of thousands of sources at risk.

But Obama’s attorney general, Eric Holder, waited five months after the first WikiLeaks tranche of stolen information was released and then finally said: “I authorized just last week a number of things to be done so that we can, hopefully, get to the bottom of this and hold people accountable as they should be.” 

That was two and half years ago. Since then, the administration has done nothing serious to WikiLeaks.

Obama administration sloppiness with national security information is also why the doctor who helped us identify Usama bin Laden is rotting in a Pakistani jail. 

Other White House leaks revealed Washington’s role in the Stuxnet computer virus, which temporarily sabotaged the Iranian nuclear weapons program. 

No one paid a price for those leaks, although the Obama Justice Department did target Fox News reporter James Rosen because he was told of a classified report that discredited the administration’s North Korea policy.

Enter Snowden and Hong Kong into this picture. Is it that surprising that Hong Kong took a look at a weak president, seemingly committed to American withdrawal from the world, and an administration that only cares about protecting secrets when it’s useful for domestic political purposes, and then decided to flip Washington the bird?





headline: Obama’s plan to let Syrians into US undermines needs of Americans, business
byline: By Richard Grenell


Despite two years of inaction, President Obama has now pledged increased military and humanitarian support for the Syrian rebel forces. After nearly 100,000 casualties, mostly civilian, the administration has finally been moved enough to intervene, going as far as extending the Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for Syrian Refugees to allow 9,000 undereducated and poverty-stricken Syrians into the U.S.

The Obama administration’s move will have little to no effect on the two-year plus Syrian refugee disaster, and further, makes no sense in the context of our country’s current immigration crisis. More than 40,000 high-skilled applicants are denied entry into the U.S. every year due to caps on the H1B visa, the visa designed for highly skilled laborers. And according to a recent survey by the Manpower Group, 39 percent of U.S. manufacturers have job openings for which they cannot find a qualified applicant.

These caps prevent American companies from harnessing talent abroad and hamper their ability to expand and create jobs in the U.S. So why is Obama bringing unskilled labor into the U.S. while denying entry to the highly skilled workers?

Obama and his administration have become the water boys for their varsity foreign-policy quarterback, Vladimir Putin.

The answer lies in President Obama’s deferential relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin. As we have seen in the unfolding Edward Snowden chase, Putin doesn’t care what Obama thinks. American influence over Russia has waned since Hillary Clinton pressed the reset button on the relationship. Sadly, there seems to be no consequences from the White House for the willful ignoring of U.S. demands. For the past two years the Russian president has also successfully blocked U.S. action and assistance to the Syrian rebels. Obama’s inaction has benefitted Russia’s ally, Syrian President Bashar Assad, at a time when most world leaders are hoping to topple him.

Despite its geographic proximity to the conflict, Russia has not accepted any of the thousands of Syrian refugees applying for asylum. When the United Nations Security Council attempted to organize an inspection of the Syrian refugee camps in Jordan last month, Russia joined China in issuing a veto, preventing much-needed oversight of a dangerously developing situation. Despite its pledge to give millions in humanitarian aid to Syrians, its actions make clear that Russia cares not for those suffering from the conflict.

President Obama, on the other hand, has been unable to act decisively in the face of Russian opposition to ensure the fall of the Assad regime. His recent turn toward a policy of compassion and mild assistance is remarkable given his repeated support for the UN’s ‘Responsibility To Protect’ concept. The “Russian reset,” the term Hillary Clinton coined to describe the Obama administration’s new policies toward Russia, has resulted in a dramatic change in how the two countries interact. The problem is the consequence has been a weakened Washington and an emboldened Moscow.

Caught on open microphone last year requesting “flexibility” from Russian Prime Minister Dimitri Medvedev in dealing with substantive policy issues before his re-election, the White House’s dealings with Russia have been characterized by one weak and pitiful failure after another. Following a speech by Secretary Clinton last December, in which she accused Putin of trying to “re-Sovietize the region,” tensions between the White House and Kremlin remain at their highest in decades. As further proof, John Kerry, during his trip to the Kremlin last month, was left waiting for three hours to meet with Putin and Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov. Obama and his administration have become the water boys for their varsity foreign-policy quarterback, Vladimir Putin.

As Obama begins to unfold his plans for intervention in Syria, it’s hard to expect anything more than words. As long as the Kremlin opposes the fall of Assad, it seems President Obama is content to let the situation linger at the expense of the Syrian civilian population. To make matters worse, his policy to allow 9,000 uneducated Syrians into the United States while the unemployment rate is at record levels signals an indifference to the millions of Americans struggling to find work.







headline: As Egypt unravels, Team Obama increases support for Muslim Brotherhood
byline: By Jay Sekulow


The news from Egypt is grim.

Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood president, Mohammed Morsi made international headlines this week as he appointed Adel Al Khayat as governor of Luxor, an ancient Egyptian city that is key tourist destination.

The problem with Mr. Khayat? He just happens to lead the “political” arm of a terrorist organization that massacred tourists in Luxor in 1997. The details of the attack are beyond grisly, with many of the dead disemboweled and notes “praising Islam” placed inside their mutilated bodies.

When it comes to the Middle East, we have proven to be the worst of friends and the best of enemies.

And that’s not all.

On Tuesday, the New York Times reported on the rise of blasphemy prosecutions since Morsi ascended to power.

[pullquote]

In recent cases, Egyptian courts have sentenced a writer to 5 years in prison for allegedly promoting atheism, sentenced a lawyer to a year in prison for allegedly insulting Islam in a private conversation, and fined a Christian schoolteacher $14,000 for allegedly insulting Muhammed in her classroom.

These recent revelations pile on top of the “old” news, including violations of the peace treaty with Israel, failing to protect our American embassy from attacks, and launching systematic crackdowns on Egypt’s Coptic Christian community.

Against this backdrop of Shariah and jihad – and hidden behind the blanket news coverage of the Obama administration’s other scandals – the White House has decided to increase its financial support for the Muslim Brotherhood, quietly clearing the way for the U.S. to give Egypt $1.3 billion in military aid.

On May 10, the very day that Lois Lerner issued her contrived apology for the IRS targeting conservative groups, Secretary of State John Kerry formally waived – on national security grounds – statutory requirements that he certify that Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood government was “implementing policies to protect freedom of expression, association, and religion, and due process of law” before providing any further American military aid.

Think about this for a moment: The Obama administration threw the Mubarak regime (for all its flaws, a stalwart American ally that kept peace with Israel) under the bus ostensibly because of its human rights violations but is waiving human rights conditions to prop up a more brutal jihadist government.

Let’s not forget the motto of the Muslim Brotherhood: "Allah is our objective. The Prophet is our leader. The Koran is our law. Jihad is our way. Dying in the way of Allah is our highest hope."

That is the organization that we are empowering – that we are arming – at American taxpayer expense.

In the coming days and weeks, secular and Christian opposition leaders are planning nationwide protests against a Morsi regime that has proven competent at implementing Shariah law but not at running an economy.

Morsi’s jihadist allies plan a crackdown, and if and when they succeed, you may see the terrible sight of American-made and taxpayer-purchased tanks and other armored vehicles literally crushing the Christian opposition.

The saying goes that there is “no better friend and no worse enemy” than a United States Marine.

The Obama administration has turned this on its head. -- When it comes to the Middle East, we have proven to be the worst of friends and the best of enemies.

We sat on our hands during Iran’s Green Revolution, when the Mullahs were briefly in danger of being overthrown.

We similarly sat on our hands in the early days of the Syrian uprising against the brutal, Iran-allied Assad regime, before jihadists had taken over the Syrian opposition.

But we acted quickly to support the Egyptian uprising, tossing aside a longtime ally.

Across the Middle East, jihad is ascendant. The Mullahs remain comfortably in power in Iran (busy building a bomb), Syria’s opposition is dominated by Al Qaeda-affiliated militias, and Egypt is firmly in the hands of the Muslim Brotherhood.

And now we’re arming Egypt and considering arming jihadist rebels in Syria.

The Obama administration is doubling down on failure – at the expense of Egyptian Christians and the American taxpayer.





headline: Three reasons why you can’t beat small town life
byline: By Andy Andrews


My family lives in a small town on the Gulf Coast. Orange Beach, Alabama boasts a population of only 4,000 people and we love it here. In 2004, when Hurricane Ivan destroyed our house and those of many of our friends, we were constantly asked, “Isn’t there anywhere else you want to live?”

I understood the point. After all, Polly and I had been to places we thought were more beautiful. We had experienced locations more temperate. Frankly, there was more to do almost anywhere else. 

Still to this day, however, we’ve never been to a place that feels quite like Orange Beach.

There is something special about these folks and this area.

Why? Three reasons:

1. Kevin is Here

And Brian and Pat and Sandy and Joe and Alan and the Gibbons and the Haynes and the Martins. Uncle Bob vacations here in the summer. SB lives here. And PC and the Woo. Tommie, Jerry and Katrina, Art and Donna, Greta and Greg, Ted and Kathryn, and the Romanos. Debbie and Steve are back with Eli and Bailey Grace after having lived for three years in Washington, D.C. Mr. Dave and Miss Mary are back.

Louisiana is fine, but it isn’t Orange Beach.

Pat, Claudia, Hunter, and Shelby live right across the street. And Joey and Elizabeth are here. (I continue to love them despite the fact that they sent my boys home with TWO kittens.) 

These are just a sampling of the awesome friends who live near us. And most of the other people here are just like them.

There is something special about these folks and this area.

When Hurricane Ivan blasted through Wolf Bay Lodge (one of our favorite places to eat), some of the things that blew away in the storm were the more than 10,000 one-dollar bills that had been signed and stapled to the ceiling throughout the past 20 years.

No one knows how many were lost at sea, but of the bills that were spread over 30 miles of coastline, 7,500 of them were returned.

That's right. More than 7,500 one-dollar bills were returned by people who said, "We saw the bill was signed, so we knew it belonged to you.”

2. We Get Help Raising Our Kids.

I have two sons—a 13-year-old, Austin, and an 11-year-old, Adam. I love these monkeys more than anything in the world. But I know it’s going to take more than just their mama and their daddy to shape them into the men they have the potential to become.

That’s where the people in Orange Beach come in. 

We know the people in our church.

We know the people in the grocery store and the bank.

We know the Little League coaches and umpires.

We know everybody. And we’ve made sure they know how we want our boys to be raised.

Polly and I have given everyone in town permission to correct our sons when they say “no” instead of “no sir” or “no ma’am.” We’ve given them permission to make our boys shake their hands firmly and with a smile.

The fact is, we live in a town where the mayor still pulls his car over to ask a group of teenagers why they aren’t in school when it’s two o’clock on a Wednesday afternoon.

The amazing part is that he does this without fear of reproach from the kids’ parents.

Imagine that!

3. My History is Here.

I read somewhere that almost 90% of us feel strong ties to a specific city or state.

I certainly do.

My parents honeymooned on the Alabama coast in 1957 and took a week's vacation here every year until they died.

My sister, Kristi, and I went on all those vacations and in a way, we grew up here.

I see things that remind me of them every day. Many of the restaurants and the businesses and churches are in the same place.

Daddy took me to Frith's bait shop to buy our live shrimp when I was a little boy.

Soon after Mama and Daddy died, I worked there for a while, selling those shrimp by the dozen under the watchful eye of Mr. Frith.

Now, I take my little boys in to buy shrimp from Mr. Frith's son, Butch. I could catch them myself, but Butch shakes their hands and teases them about the size of the fish in the stories they tell.

It's worth whatever I have to pay to feel that sense of my daddy in that shop watching the grandsons he never got to meet.

Polly and I lived in a small condo when we got married, but we have only owned one house.

It is the same one we live in today.

It is where our boys have always lived. It is where I write. It is the place we have laughed most often, cried occasionally, and come to know ourselves. More than a house, it is our home.

So that is why we live in this small town of 4,000 people, Orange Beach, Alabama.

They might not be the greatest reasons, but they are our reasons. And even through the stressful years after Ivan—even though we swore if it ever happened again, we would move—I suspect we might be here for a long time still.

No matter what.





headline: Zimmerman jury is homogeneous -- and dangerous
byline: By Tamara Holder


The selected jury members of the George Zimmerman trial could hardly be more homogeneous -- and potentially disastrous.

Zimmerman is facing second-degree murder charges for the death of Trayvon Martin, a 17-year-old African-American. Primarily because Zimmerman is not African-American, and was not immediately charged with any crime, the case has sparked a racially charged, well-publicized debate.

The Constitution requires, via the Sixth Amendment, that “the accused shall enjoy a right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury” where the crime was committed. There is no constitutional requirement that the jury shall be made up of the defendant’s “peers.”

Jury selection was expected to take 2-3 weeks. It began with an initial pool of 211 people that filled out questionnaires. By the end of Day 7, only 58 of the 211 were questioned by attorneys about their knowledge of the case; additionally, the attorneys selected 40 of 58 to advance to the next round of more in-depth questioning. Of the final 40, with regard to gender: 24 were women, and 16 were men. With regard to race: 27 were white, 7 were black, 3 were of mixed race, and 3 were Hispanic.

In just two days, Days 8 and 9, both sides questioned all 40 potential jurors.

By the end of Day 9, 30 of the people were dismissed and the remaining 10 were selected as the primary and alternate members. Both sides moved way too quickly.

Both sides lost focus. As a result, the composition of the selected jury is guaranteed to reignite racial debates before the trial even begins.

All of the six members are women. Five are white, one is Hispanic. The four alternates include two women and two men, all of whom are white, but for one male Hispanic.

Seminole County, the area from which the jury pool was selected, is more than 81 percent white, between 9-11 percent African-American, and consists of more than 50 percent women, according to the Seminole County Government and U.S. Census. Sanford, the city where the incident occurred, is approximately 29 percent African-American.

Zimmerman’s jury is 100 percent women and 0 percent African-American.

This jury needed at least one African-American jury member, and one male. The selected panel can certainly be “impartial,” but because previous racially charged trials focused on the jury, the Zimmerman trial attorneys should have been aware of how the make-up could impact responses outside of the courtroom and, potentially, to the safety of the jurors.

America has not seen a racially charged case like this since the O.J. Simpson trial. In that case, there were 12 jurors: Nine were African-American, two were white, and one was Hispanic. Ten of the 12 jurors were female.

The “not guilty” Simpson verdict sparked great divisiveness across the country. Some alleged that Simpson was only found not guilty because the predominantly black jury did not want to convict a fellow member of the African-American community.

The George Zimmerman prosecution and defense teams should have considered the potential for such a response in this case, because race was at issue from the outset.

This case should not be about race, but the attorneys’ failure to pick a more diverse group of six people is certain to reignite the issue, especially if the 100 percent all-female/non-African-American jury finds Mr. Zimmerman not guilty.





headline: Mainstream media ignore current events in coverage of Voting Rights decision
byline: By Dan Gainor


The South doesn’t need to rise again. It has the evening news shows for that.

Tuesday, the Supreme Court struck down as key part of the Voting Rights Act and the broadcast networks took us back in time to the civil rights era 37 separate times.

ABC, CBS and NBC underscored their support for the law by filling their broadcasts with images straight out of Jim Crow. Pictures of police dogs attacking protesters, police officers beating and arresting African-Americans filled the screens in photograph or video.

The court ruling stated that “history didn’t end in 1965,” but you’d never know it by watching the networks, especially ABC.

That network used 21 separate images and videos of the civil rights era and it wasn’t just to show off the its spiffy archive of news footage. It was to depict the law as one correcting great injustices.

The Supreme Court struck down a key part of the Voting Rights Act in 2013 and the broadcast networks took us back in time to the civil rights era 37 separate times.

But those injustices were two generations ago – from an era before an African-American president sat in the White House. They also predated much of what makes up 21st Century America – from iPods, Twitter and the Internet to predictions that America will soon be a majority minority nation.

None of that was good enough for journalists to dwell on events in the 21st Century. Instead, they were clearly angry over the decision. The historic images were the visual expression of that anger. But there were ample examples of more current comments that made it hard to distinguish between journalists and the activists they interviewed.

NBC “Nightly News” anchor Brian Williams began with the subtlety of civil rights era Democrat Bull Connor.

“As one reporter put it today, the U.S. Supreme Court has driven a stake through the heart of the most important civil rights law ever enacted – the Voting Rights Act.”

Williams also teased the story by saying the court “goes after the very heart of the most important civil rights law in U.S. history.”

Correspondent Pete Williams echoed the anchor’s theme and hyperbolic wording. “The court’s conservatives today followed through on a threat they made four years ago to strike at the heart of the Voting Rights Act unless Congress updated it,” he said.

Over a backdrop of images showing African-Americans being abused and arrested, ABC’s Terry Moran explained, “This is why the Voting Rights Act was passed.” That broadcast followed up with an interview with omnipresent civil right hero Rep. John Lewis. The Georgia Democrat managed to be interviewed on all three evening news shows, MSNBC, CNN and still pen an op-ed for The Washington Post.

CBS anchor Scott Pelley said the court “essentially knocked down one of the pillars of the civil rights movement.”

In a follow-up report from Mississippi, correspondent Mark Strassmann interviewed people on both sides of the issue. But he made sure he summed up the issue the way he and other journalists viewed it – from the left. “The weight of history on this community might be lighter, but it has not fully lifted.”

Lefties on the Web and in print were even more upset, though they used some of the identical phrasing.

The liberal Huffington Post echoed the heart theme with a headline saying : “Civil Rights Icon: Supremes ‘Put A Dagger In Heart Of Voting Rights Act’…”

Georgia Democratic Rep. John Lewis repeated that in a piece he wrote for The Washington Post, claiming: “The Supreme Court has stuck a dagger into the heart of the Voting Rights Act.” That phrase is one he also used on CBS “Evening News” and ABC’s “World News with Diane Sawyer.”

Across the media, hearts were getting abused so much, it looked more like an episode of “True Blood.”

The New York Times’ Adam Liptak certainly had heart. “The Supreme Court on Tuesday effectively struck down the heart of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 by a 5-to-4 vote, freeing nine states, mostly in the South, to change their election laws without advance federal approval,” he wrote.

Liberal Rick Ungar went even further than just the heart in an op-ed he wrote for Forbes. “In a 5-4 decision along the ideological lines one might expect, the Supreme Court today cut out the heart and soul of the Voting Rights Act of 1965,” he claimed.

On MSNBC, Chris Hayes said “Section 5 is often referred to as the heart of the Voting Rights Act.” In the background, he had a graphic saying “Killing the Voting Rights Act.” Surprisingly, the graphic lacked a vampire slayer, stake in hand. Rachel Maddow followed up her own reading of the Lewis quote, by paraphrasing it. “The thing about the dagger in the heart, is that the patient is still alive,” she explained.

Although Lewis turned up in so many locations it looked like he had embraced cloning, that wasn’t the issue. He is a veteran of the civil rights movement and a natural for this story. The bigger issue is which Democrat issued the “heart” talking point and how did he/she get so many “journalists” to embrace it so quickly? Was it Lewis?

Even when liberals weren’t being heart-felt, they were still upset.

One of The Washington Post’s many liberal columnists, Dana Milbank complained about “conservative activism,” echoing the standard left-wing talking points for the justices striking down sweeping government regulation.

The New York Times editorial board unsurprisingly called the decision “another damaging and intellectually dishonest ruling.” The constitutionally ignorant Times claimed “the 5-to-4 ruling usurped Congress’s power,” forgetting the Supremes also have a wee bit of power.

The hardcore left went even more apoplectic.

Salon editor at large Joan Walsh blasted the ruling as “The ugly SCOTUS voting rights flim-flam.”And it wouldn’t be crazy without at least one Hitler/Holocaust comparison, in this case, brought to us by MSNBC’s Michael Eric Dyson. He went on the “Martin Bashir” show to bring the lunacy in a comment about Justice Clarence Thomas.

“A symbolic Jew has invited a metaphoric Hitler to commit holocaust and genocide upon his own people.”

That was pretty much in character for liberals who included Minnesota Democratic State Rep. Ryan Winkler Minnesota using Twitter to call Justice Thomas “Uncle Thomas.” He later apologized. Had he been conservative saying that to a liberal, you’d need the back of a milk carton to find his remaining career.

All in all, Tuesday's decision brought out a typical mainstream media reaction. Next up, the same folks will be showing clips from “Birth of a Nation” to make their point.

No, wait, that might be too subtle.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Why Jewish life is thriving in today's Poland
byline: By Alan Gill


When Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu visited Poland last week, he found a Polish Jewish community virtually unrecognizable to any student of history. That’s because 22 years after the fall of communism and more than 70 years after the Nazis annihilated three million Polish Jews (of the 6 million total Jews murdered), Polish Jews are embracing their identity and faith in inspiring and frankly unbelievable ways.

And that’s not just because there is a laudable Museum of the History of Polish Jews that opened with fanfare last month or a moving tribute to the anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising that brought international attention to the bravery of the Ghetto fighters so many years after their heroic actions.

It’s because the country’s 25,000 Jews – though a far cry from the millions that built a robust Jewish civilization throughout pre-war Poland – are eager to innovate Jewish life through street festivals, educational and religious programs, and by investigating their family’s past, despite the pain.

Today, in tens of thousands of Jewish faces and lives Jewish life in Poland is blossoming. And that is cause for celebration.

And this is extraordinary in a country whose Communist-led post-1967 “anti-Zionist” purges forced many Jews to either emigrate from Poland or head underground, hiding their identities for many decades to come. And yet after Communism fell, some Jews – like their Catholic neighbors who enthusiastically clung to their faith – were able to explore what it meant to be a Jew in a place where for the better part of 50 years it was unthinkable. And in many ways it was because a parent or grandparent shockingly revealed their Jewish heritage on their deathbeds.

So how did this happen?

Quietly and effectively, local and international Jewish organizations, philanthropists, and advocates – running the pluralistic gamut of religious movements and cultural options – have invested in both Jewish people (some who proudly identified as such and others who have since “come out”) and in synagogues, community-wide Sabbath dinners, camping experiences, Jewish learning conferences, Jewish Community Centers and youth clubs, urban holiday events, study groups, and even Jewish cooking classes.

Today in Warsaw and Krakow, centers of Jewish life, one can take a Hebrew class in the morning, learn how to make latkes at lunchtime, and meet with other people who are exploring their Jewish heritage – in some cases long hidden by their families for fear of persecution – at night.

Young Polish Jews are also leading the way. In many ways they have inherited a tremendous historical legacy, but are remaking it in their own image.

Take Antonina Samecka, a Polish Jewish fashion designer whose RISK. MADE IN WARSAW brand has a special line festooned with Jewish imagery and humor. By incorporating Stars of David in the design and creating a “You Had Me At Shalom” T-shirt, it embodies the vanguard of Jewish Poland today – a mix of pride and creativity.

And the picture would not be complete without mentioning Jewish heritage tours around the country, family genealogy research in corners of Poland where there are no Jews left, and a trend among some Jews to acquire a EU passport and embrace the country their parents and grandparents left behind.

Add to this a growing number of Jewish expats living and breathing Polish culture and language and you have an enigmatic phenomenon that is bolstering a local community’s confidence in itself and its identity.

Such confidence has led to extraordinary results: just this past weekend in Krakow, the 7@Nite Festival opened the historic city’s seven remaining synagogues to the public for a lively celebration of Jewish life and culture attended by thousands of people.

This event –organized and run by my organization with other local Jewish groups – hosts everything from a poetry reading to a multimedia tour through the seven gates of Jerusalem, from a dance workshop to a photography exhibition, from DJs playing Jewish funk, rock, and hip-hop to a hummus and grilled vegetable feast in a synagogue courtyard.

For Krakow resident Bozena Pitorak, a civil engineer, 7@Nite was the perfect way to reconnect with her Jewish roots as her mother was Jewish. Last year she attended 7@Nite at the urging of her son and was immediately inspired by an Israeli dance workshop.

Soon after, Pitorak started taking Hebrew classes at the Krakow JCC, became a member, and frequently attends Shabbat dinners and Jewish holiday celebrations. This year, she returned to the festival as a volunteer, proudly transformed and Jewishly identified.

“After reconnecting to Judaism I feel stronger, and this influences my private life and my work,” she said. “My dream is that more Jews come out, go to the synagogue, and become members of the community.”

In a scene in Steven Spielberg’s iconic film "Schindler’s List," the brutal Nazi Amon Goeth proudly hails that he and his soldiers are about to destroy 600 years of Jewish history in Krakow. And although they succeeded in liquidating the city’s ghetto and sending the survivors to the death camps, the winds of history have shifted to prove him wrong.

Today, in tens of thousands of Jewish faces and lives, in song and prayer, and even in new forms of Jewish self-expression, Jewish life in Poland is blossoming. And that is cause for celebration.





headline: My fellow Republicans, the future is now
byline: By Cal Thomas


The Faith and Freedom Coalition held a gathering last week in Washington, D.C. It resembled many similar conservative assemblies: mostly white male speakers, a mostly white, middle-age audience and mostly full of attacks on President Obama, liberals, Democrats and Washington.

That is not a winning strategy for political victory.

Neither are appeals to a bygone era that is unlikely to return.

The social, financial and governmental dysfunction we are experiencing are symptoms of something far deeper. The foundations that built and have sustained America are being destroyed.

Republicans and conservatives (they are not always the same) must seize the future rather than hold on to the past.

Too many Republicans and conservatives mistakenly believe what's needed is a paint job, like those false storefronts painted on closed-down businesses in some Northern Ireland towns to hide its struggling economy during the G8 summit.

Instead of more navel-gazing, Republicans and conservatives (they are not always the same) must seize the future rather than hold on to the past.

Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich believes America may be on the verge of another major breakthrough on several levels, but he warns in a book titled "Breakout" to be published this fall (Regnery Publishing, Inc.) about powerful forces opposed to the advance.

"Prison guards of the past," he calls them, as opposed to "pioneers of the future." If the future has publicists, he says, the past has lobbyists.

Gingrich believes, and polls reflect this, that people are weary of the left-right, Republican vs. Democrat repetitive drama. He thinks the next decade will be more future vs. past.

What is needed, he says, "is a movement dedicated to identifying and encouraging the pioneers of the future," while fighting for the policies and structural changes that will hasten its arrival. He labels it the "Breakout Party," though he thinks this shift can still be achieved within the GOP.

Gingrich says a breakout occurs when "so many different new scientific and technological capabilities are emerging and being translated into usable products by entrepreneurs in a dynamic consumer-led market that the very capacity of life, for the individual, for society, for business, and for government, is changing."

Neither party has a clear understanding of what this can mean for the country.

Neither, says Gingrich, does either party have a strategy for knitting together a coalition of these pioneers who are already creating the future, but largely under the media's radar. The media could be said to be one of the "prison guards," because they mostly focus on the old arguments rather than on solutions.

Here are two examples of what he is talking about. Instead of focusing mainly on caring for the sick, the emphasis should be on finding cures for diseases, like Alzheimer's and cancer, which are costly to treat.

Example two: the House leadership last Tuesday brought a bill to the floor that would ban abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy. The bill has zero chance of passing the Senate. It has less chance of being signed by the president.

Instead, Republicans should place themselves on the side of giving more information to women, empowering them by making it law that they view a sonogram of their baby before they have an abortion. That could possibly lead to fewer abortions, the goal of pro-lifers, and likely make ineffective legislative measures unnecessary.

With abortion and so many other issues, Republicans are locked in an ideological prison. It isn't about compromising pro-life and other principles. It is about looking to the future and re-crafting the argument for a new generation that doesn't speak the language of the past or accept many of its values.

"The opportunity for Republicans to play the lead role in developing a breakout system is historic," says Gingrich, "and will both reward the party with victory and reward the country with vast new opportunities for jobs, economic growth, long-term prosperity, greater learning, better health and greater security."

What's not to like about that? As the late Washington Redskins head coach George Allen said: "The future is now."



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Was the Unabomber correct?
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Ted Kaczynski, aka the Unabomber, was rightly imprisoned for life in 1998 for sending bombs that maimed and killed three people and injured 23 more, from 1978 to 1992. No one can excuse his terrorism.

Kaczynski’s ideas, however, described in a manifesto entitled, "Industrial Society and Its Future," cannot be dismissed, and are increasingly important as our society hurtles toward individual disempowerment at the hands of technology and political forces that erode autonomy.

“Industrial Society and its Future” was published on September 19, 1995 by The New York Times and The Washington Post, to comply with Kaczynski’s demand, in exchange for him stopping the bombings.

Kaczynski, who is still alive, wrote that the increasing industrialization of America and the world, and our increasing reliance on technology, would end up short-circuiting the ability of human beings to think for themselves and act on their own ideas and abilities. 

Kaczynski must wonder what it will take for Americans to wake up to the fact that their individuality and autonomy is under siege

He saw the political “left” as embracing these technologies with special fervor, because they were in keeping with the “leftist” ideology that centralized power was the way to govern men. 

He saw these “leftists” as psychologically disordered—seeking to compensate for deep feelings of personal disempowerment by banding together and seeking extraordinary means of control in society.

Well, Kaczynski, while reprehensible for murdering and maiming people, was precisely correct in many of his ideas. 

Watching the development of Facebook heighten the narcissism of tens of millions of people, turning them into mini-reality TV versions of themselves, I would bet he knows, with even more certainty, that he was onto something.

Witnessing average Americans “tweeting” about their daily activities as though they were celebrities, with fans clamoring to know their whereabouts, he must marvel at the ease with which technology taps the ego and drains the soul. 

Thinking about the widespread use of GPS, he must wonder whether anyone realizes that following illuminated maps to get where you are going actually erodes your real sense of direction—on highways and, perhaps, in life. 

Hearing about Google Glass – a new device that will only sap the ability of users, in my opinion, to see anything clearly, Kaczynski might even prefer the reality of the iron bars and solitude of his cell. 

At least they, he may be thinking, are real. 

And having seen Barack Obama elected, in part, by mastering the use of the Internet as a campaign tool, then watching his administration preside over eavesdropping on the American public, monitoring their emails and tapping their phones, denying them their due process and privacy, and making a play to disarm them, Kaczynski, must wonder what it will take for Americans to wake up to the fact that their individuality and autonomy—indeed, what constitutes the core of a human life—is under siege (by the very forces he predicted—technology and leftist political leaders).

What the Unabomber did was reprehensible. And he was wrong: Killing people to bring attention to his ideas ended up making most people lock up his ideas, along with him. They became unmentionable, for politically correct folks.

Well, I would rather be correct, than politically correct. And it is time for people to read “Industrial Society and its Future,” by convicted serial killer Ted Kaczynski. His work, despite his deeds, deserves a place alongside “Brave New World,” by Aldous Huxley, and “1984,” by George Orwell.





headline: The Zimmerman trial is already over
byline: By John Lott


Prosecutors in the George Zimmerman second degree murder trial have pushed hard on two points as they seek to make their case against him: that the injuries to Zimmerman on the night Trayvon Martin died were “insignificant” and that he had studied Florida’s “Stand Your Ground” law in a college class in 2010.

To win conviction on second-degree murder, the prosecution has to show that the death was caused by a criminal act “demonstrating a depraved mind without regard for human life.” 

That’s why the prosecutor keeps pushing the claim that Zimmerman profiled Martin because he was black. Meanwhile, the lesser charge of manslaughter generally is a crime committed in the heat of passion, where there is no premeditation. The jury would have to believe Zimmerman lost his temper in shooting Martin.

This is a case that prosecutors should never have brought but they let politics influence their decision.

People can use force to protect themselves when they reasonably believe it is “necessary to prevent imminent death or great bodily harm to themselves.” On this score, the testimony of the Jacksonville medical examiner, Valerie Rao, that Zimmerman injuries were “insignificant” is largely irrelevant. 

A broken nose, a head being slammed into cement, and punches to the face may not have left Zimmerman incapacitated. The important question is whether such an attack with a man on top of him would leave Zimmerman to “reasonably believe” that there was a threat of “imminent death or great bodily harm to himself.”

Much was also made of the class Zimmerman took class at Seminole State College taught by Professor Alexis Carter. The key supposedly was that Zimmerman really did understand Florida’s “Stand Your Ground” law. Prosecutor Richard Mantei told the court that Zimmerman's legal studies would help jurors understand his "state of mind" and "ambitions and frustrations" before the shooting.

Some pundits, such as Fox News’ Bob Beckel, bought the claim: “I think that the prosecution got back in the case today for a very simple reason: this professor made it very clear that Zimmerman knew everything about the ‘Stand Your Ground’ law and in that ‘Stand Your Ground,’ according to the professor, there are reasons that you could use your gun if necessary but this was not an extreme enough case to do that. I think that the prosecution is back in it, back in it strong.”

One can debate about whether Zimmerman remembered the part of that lecture from the class. Nevertheless, it is really beside the point because whether Zimmerman’s actions were legal has nothing to do with the “Stand Your Ground” law. 

Prior to “Stand Your Ground,” citizens who wanted to defend themselves from a criminal had to retreat as far as possible and then announce to the criminal that they were going to shoot. The “Stand Your Ground” law simply replaced the original requirement to retreat to a “reasonable person’s” standard, instead stating that lethal force is justified when a reasonable person would believe that a criminal intends to inflict serious bodily harm or death.

But Zimmerman’s defense has never raised the “Stand Your Ground” law for one simple reason: with Zimmerman on his back and Trayvon Martin holding him down, he had no option to retreat.

None of the testimony ever explained why the “Stand Your Ground” law was even relevant to Zimmerman’s actions. How Beckel comes away with the notion all this means that Zimmerman didn’t have “an extreme enough case” to defend himself is hardly obvious.

Prosecutors’ problem is that they have to do more than eventually convince people that their version of events is “likely,” and they haven’t come close to doing that. Instead, they have to show that they are true beyond a “reasonable doubt.” To put it differently, to say something is “likely” just means that there is over a 50 percent chance it is true. To say something is beyond a reasonable doubt means that it is much closer to 100 percent.

The tragic thing about the case is how many people jumped to conclusions before they knew the facts. Many conservative commentators claimed early on that Zimmerman had acted improperly (Mona Charen, Rich Lowry, Heather Mac Donald, Robert VerBruggen, and Gregory Kane). 

Comments by President Obama, Al Sharpton, and others surely stirred up the racial aspects of the case and appear to have generated many cases across the country where blacks attacked whites to avenge Trayvon Martin (e.g.,Gainesville, Florida; Oak Park, Illinois; Mobile, Alabama; Toledo, Ohio; Grand Rapids, Michigan; and Norfolk, Virginia).

It is a case that prosecutors should never have brought, but they let politics influence their decision.

Next, it will be the defense’s turn to present their case. But, for all practical purposes, the Zimmerman trial is already over.





headline: Five myths about telephone snooping and our government
byline: By Gary Shapiro


The recent revelation that our government captures and analyzes our telephone data has created a media frenzy, with histrionic headline writers and apoplectic commentators. Yet despite the outcry from the media, the ACLU and the Tea Party, according to a recent Pew/Washington Post poll, 56 percent of Americans have no problem with the program.

All of the hype has generated lots of myths about the National Security Administration’s (NSA) anti-terrorism, phone-monitoring program.

We can’t allow hyperbole and fear to blind us to the reality that in order to stay safe, we have to give government access to certain information. This is not unconstitutional and it does not mean the government is spying on us. I have broken the myths down into five common misconceptions:

We can’t allow hyperbole and fear to blind us to the reality that in order to stay safe, we have to give government access to certain information.

1. Collecting my telephone data is unconstitutional.

Our Constitution bans “unreasonable searches and seizures” and sets the basis for search warrants. “Administrative” searches targeting big groups such as airline travelers or drivers stopped by a roadblock for sobriety tests have been held constitutional.

The Bush-Obama program that allows the government to obtain our phone data is even safer legally, as it uses a process created by Congress relying on judge-approved warrants.

What makes the warrants unusual is that they apply to every American using a telephone.

However, government can monitor only external features of calls: the number dialed and the duration. They cannot listen to the call itself.

Our calling data is certainly less personal than fingerprinting, tax returns and medical records under ObamaCare.

The Supreme Court will likely hold that the limited scope of the searches, minimal intrusion, and the need to avoid a terrorist event, coupled with the fact that the majority of Americans consider the program necessary, do not categorize the NSA program as “unreasonable.”

2. This violates my privacy.

You may feel whom you call is your private information, but legally it can be obtained in criminal, divorce, tort and almost any other lawsuit, even if you are not a party.

In a way, privacy in phone records is like privacy in so-called "snail mail": your right to privacy ensures others do not read the letter, but anyone can see the name on the envelope.

3. This proves the government is monitoring my telephone calls.

Not true. The government is not listening to your calls. The NSA program simply uses telephone company records to analyze which numbers are being called and the duration of the calls. They have access to your phone records, not what you said.

4. Government employees should not be looking at my call data.

With an estimated 20 trillion phone “transactions” in the database, the chances of becoming the subject of a human analyst’s review of your records – especially if you’re not a person of interest engaging in suspicious behavior – are infinitesimal.

A data set that large requires sophisticated computer programs to sift through and look for significant data anomalies that highlight people in sensitive positions who are talking to people who are talking to terrorists.

If TSA agents, commercial pilots, nuclear and chemical engineers, biologists, bomb experts and others with the ability to kill large numbers of Americans are talking to people who are talking to terrorists, I want our government to know.

Don’t you?

5. My call information does not help fight terrorism.

This would almost certainly be true if it was your information alone. But aggregated with other call information, it allows the government to see patterns which may predict a risk of terrorism.

Your credit card company monitors your buying patterns so it can alert you if it thinks your card has been stolen. The government’s telephone data collection program does this in aggregate to identify patterns of calls which may be linked to a terrorist plot.

The 9/11 terrorist attacks changed the rules. While our intelligence efforts before relied on feet on the ground and Mata Hari-style infiltration, we cannot rely on these techniques to protect us from radical Muslim terrorists.

Our best tool is American ingenuity. This ingenuity allows us to create algorithms which sift through massive amounts of data to find patterns of information.

Yes, we are trading some privacy for greater safety. But that is a tradeoff we make every day, and in this case the benefits of thwarting even one terrorist plot outweigh the tiny burden of sharing our phone records.

We must be smarter, more innovative and take advantage of our technological edge in our battle with terrorists. We must also preserve our liberty and constitutional rights. The current telephone data program does both.





headline: Will Obama and US stand with or against Egypt's people?
byline: By Michael Meunier


In a rare historic moment for humanity, the BBC reported on June 30, 2013, that “the number of anti-Muslim Brotherhood protesters today in Egypt is the largest number in a political event in the history of mankind.”

The Egyptian military used helicopters to track the protests across Egypt and estimated that the numbers of protesters was between 15-20 million. Other foreign media reported the number to be closer to 30 million.

Just like the 2011 revolution, the grass-roots “Tamarod” (meaning “rebellion”) movement, led by Egyptian young people and not affiliated with any political party, has spread like wildfire through the population.

The movement’s first spark came when it collected more than 22 million signatures for petitions demanding that President Morsi call for early elections after his failure to properly lead the country.

Morsi dismissed those petitions. 

In response, the movement then called for protests on Sunday, June 30, and the Egyptian people responded with an historic display of solidarity.

Americans should be ecstatic at the widespread yearning for liberty expressed in the Tamarod protests. Yet to the Egyptian public, the U.S. government appears to be on the wrong side of the fence: it’s backing the Morsi regime.

Just two weeks before the protests began U.S. Ambassador Anne Patterson delivered a speech in Cairo expressing skepticism about "street action" that could result in violent protests, equating anti-Brotherhood protest with violence.

The very next day she had one of her frequent meetings with senior Muslim Brotherhood leader Khairat al-Shater, (a man who holds no official office and is widely disliked in Egypt for supporting leaders of the terrorist group “Islamic Jihad”). The group had threatened protesters, especially Christians, with violence if they attempted to topple Morsi.

As a result, the U.S. finds itself now disliked by a majority of Egyptians in the country. Patterson’s picture on protest placards was almost as ubiquitous as Morsi’s photos were on Sunday.

By the end of the day on June 30, at least 17 Egyptians had been killed and over 800 wounded as a result of clashes between Morsi’s supporters and the protesters.

Making good on threats made prior to the protests by regime supporters in the governorate of Assiut, the first martyr of the Tamarod movement was a Christian young man named “Abanoub Adel” who was shot during the protests.

When he took office a year ago, Morsi formed a government comprised largely of Muslim Brotherhood members or their supporters. He appointed governors from the ranks of his Muslim Brotherhood leadership and seemed to be trying to turn Egypt into a private state run primarily for the benefit of the Brotherhood.

He also formed a constitutional committee -- made up almost exclusively of Islamists -- that produced a draft constitution intended to entrench their notion of an Islamic state.

Morsi declared himself above the Egyptian courts, grasping a dictator’s powers, in order to push the constitutional referendum through parliament.

The response from the Obama administration to this power grab was muted at best.

Meanwhile, the Egyptian people have been subject to the rapid deterioration of their economy and a scarcity of basic supplies of goods and services.

With Egypt having used up almost all of its strategic oil reserves, citizens have to wait on the streets for days to get a tank of gas.

At the same time, Morsi has not only revived the human rights abuses of the Mubarak era, he has exceeded them.

Morsi has jailed his opposition opponents, silenced journalists, harassed critics and plundered business owners.

He has also ignored court orders to dissolve the illegitimate upper-house of parliament.

As they did in 2011, the Egyptian people have once again risen against another tyrant.

The saying goes and it is true that “as Egypt goes, so goes the Middle East.” That is why the United States invested billions of dollars in aid and military weaponry, because as the largest Arab country in the world Egypt is critical to the strategic interests of the United States.

What is happening in Egypt directly affects U.S. policy in the region.

Americans must not allow the Obama administration to support an unjust regime that has lost its legitimacy in the eyes of the Egyptian people, and now, the world.

The heart of the American tradition is freedom, liberty and justice. Today, the American people find their government supporting a regime that is antithetical to their values.

It’s time for President Obama to unmistakably call on Morsi to heed the voice of his people and call for early elections.

This is the only move that can repair the damage done by the current failed U.S. foreign policy and the only way to begin to undo the damage already done by U.S. Ambassador Patterson.





headline: Supreme Court issues two illegitimate decisions on same-sex marriage
byline: By Brian S. Brown


Wednesday, the Supreme Court did what many of us hoped would never happen – the justices have invalidated Section 3 of the federal Defense of Marriage Act and refused to consider the lower court decision invalidating Proposition 8.

I’m furious. We at the National Organization for Marriage (NOM) and tens of millions of other Americans will never accept it.

It’s wrong, plain and simple. There’s a stench to these decisions that has stained the Supreme Court.

We will do everything in our power to preserve marriage across the country because marriage as God created is the most important social institution we can offer men, women and children.

In my view, the worst of the two decisions is the Proposition 8 case. The National Organization for Marriage and our allies fought with everything we had to preserve marriage, the foundation of society itself. We were the largest contributor to putting Proposition 8 on the ballot, actively campaigned for its passage, and contributed hundreds of thousands of dollars to help preserve it through many legal challenges.

The refusing to hear the Proposition 8 appeal has rewarded the utter dereliction of duty by California’s Governor and Attorney General, whose legal obligation was to defend initiatives adopted by the people. That leaves in place the erroneous decision of a single San Francisco federal court judge, who issued a Dred Scott and Roe v Wade type of decision – an illegitimate attempt to legislate from the bench.

The Supreme Court has blown it, rewarding corrupt public officials and judges and invalidating the right of the people of California to define marriage in the way that marriage has actually existed throughout human history – the union of one man and one woman.

Over 7 million Californians voted in favor of Proposition 8. Not content to let voters have their say, homosexual activists from Hollywood and New York hired celebrity lawyers Ted Olson and David Boies to sue and the case now known as Hollingsworth v. Perry began.

Frankly, I’ve never seen such corruption in the judicial system as I have seen in this case.

First, a homosexual judge in a long-term gay relationship was assigned the case, and refused to disclose his relationship before declaring that marriage is unconstitutional.

Then Stephen Reinhardt, the senior judge in the uber-liberal Ninth Circuit wrote the appeals court opinion invalidating Proposition 8 despite the fact that his own wife advised the lawyers challenging the initiative.

To make matters worse, the elected officials responsible for defending the vote of the people and who swore an oath to do so – then Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, current Governor Jerry Brown, and state Attorney General Kamala Harris – shamefully abandoned their duty and left marriage defenseless.

The Supreme Court has rewarded this corruption and effectively given negligent public officials a pocket veto over ballot measures they don’t like. All they have to do now is refuse to defend a law passed by the people, and it will crash and burn in the courts.

Despite the loss of marriage in California, the Supreme Court has taken pains to limit the impact of their decision to California by basing their ruling on narrow legal grounds.

It does not apply to any other state – at least for now. But you can bet that homosexual activists and their rapacious lawyers won’t let it rest at that. And that brings me to the federal Defense of Marriage Act ruling.

In a separate case the Court invalidated Section 3 of DOMA. The ruling will force the federal government to recognize same-sex relationships as “marriages” in the few outlier states that have bought into the lie and rejected thousands of years of history and common sense.And it will create chaos as same-sex couples move to other states that have held true, and demand the same recognition from and in those states.

The Supreme Court clearly also got that case wrong, but the ruling is not nearly as important as the Prop 8 ruling. Its impact is limited only to certain federal benefits and does not require any state to accept gay ‘marriages’ performed elsewhere. That section of DOMA was not challenged and remains fully in effect.

Marriage is hanging by a thread in America. It lost today in California, and those responsible will be coming after every remaining state that refuses to abandon the truth of marriage.

NOM will do everything in our power to preserve marriage across the country, because the institution of marriage as God created is the most important social institution we can offer men, women and children.





headline: What Same-Sex marriage decisions tell us about America, Constitution
byline: By Sally Kohn


The preservation of explicit inequality in the law is hard to defend and maintain. Gravity, not to mention logic, pulls toward fairness. And our institutions, including the Constitution of the United States of America, lend gravity a hand.

Wednesday, the Supreme Court correctly ruled that the so-called Defense of Marriage Act violates the Constitution and our nation's principles of equal treatment under the law. The ruling, which is as legally correct as it is morally correct, reinforces our nation's real traditional values of fairness and equality for all.

In a 5-4 ruling in United States v. Windsor, Justice Kennedy on behalf of the majority, wrote decisively, that “DOMA is unconstitutional as a deprivation of the equal liberty of persons that is protected by the Fifth Amendment.”

Today, gay couples and all of us who believe in equality and fairness will celebrate. And civilization, we shall see, will survive. 

More specifically, Kennedy writes that the very notion of DOMA -- through which the federal government denied recognition of same-sex marriages performed by the states for no reason other than explicit discrimination -- was a violation of state's rights.

By seeking to injure the very class New York seeks to protect, DOMA violates basic due process and equal protection principles applicable to the federal government.

The Constitution’s guarantee of equality “must at the very least mean that a bare congressional desire to harm a politically unpopular group cannot” justify disparate treatment of that group.

In other words, the ruling marries legal principles barring unjust discrimination with the conservative theory of federalism -- that the federal government should not interfere with the power of the states to set their own laws and policies.

In the case of conceal carry permits and electoral gerrymandering, conservatives want the federal government to show incredible deference to the acts of states.

Yet when states decide to permit loving same-sex couples to get married under the law, suddenly conservatives want the federal government to step in.

Not only is this flagrantly discriminatory, it's a violation of our Constitutional guarantee of equal protection.

Today, gay couples and all of us who believe in equality and fairness will celebrate. And tomorrow, gay couples will marry. And then more will get married. And then more. And civilization, we shall see, will survive.

Those of us who live in New York and Iowa and Massachusetts and Washington and other states that have legalized gay marriage have already found that the warnings of the demise of opposite-sex marriage were dramatically inflated.

Rest assured, all: Heteronormativity remains firmly intact.

The only thing that Wednesday's Supreme Court ruling will change is that now same-sex couples who choose to marry when allowed to do so by their states will have the same access to the over 1,000 federal rights and benefits as heterosexual couples.

Unfortunately, every other problem with which we as a nation grapple will still exist.

- We will still have discrimination.

- Gay people can still be fired from their jobs in 29 states simply because of our sexual orientation.

- Women will still be paid less than men for the same jobs.

- Domestic violence will still be a too rampant reality in far too many homes.

- Poor children will still lack access to a high quality education.

The only difference is that happy gay couples will now be happy married couples, equally protected under the law. This is a dramatic ruling for these couples and for the assertion of our fundamental legal principles and rights. But it will be strikingly un-dramatic in how our nation is affected.

The pull toward fairness in society is hardly inevitable. The abolition of slavery in America and the granting of basic legal rights to African Americans and women only came through struggle, through ordinary Americans pressuring our institutions and legal structures to yield to the gravitational pull of righteousness.

Slowly but surely, history has bent toward justice because we, the people, ultimately bend toward justice. A strong majority of Americans now support marriage equality. As we evolve, so must our laws and policies.

Wednesday's Supreme Court ruling marks an important strong turn in that arc of human history. In the majority ruling, Kennedy writes:

DOMA undermines both the public and private significance of state-sanctioned same-sex marriages; for it tells those couples, and all the world, that their otherwise valid marriages are unworthy of federal recognition. This places same-sex couples in an unstable position of being in a second-tier marriage.

Justice and fairness and equality do not come in tiers. We are one nation, under God, with liberty and justice for all.

Wednesday, the Supreme Court affirmed that our fundamental principles extend to all Americans and all families. We should all be celebrating. 





headline: Supreme Court has reexamined Voting Rights Act, now it must look at Roe v. Wade
byline: By Cal Thomas


"Character, not circumstance, makes the person." -- Booker T. Washington

The Supreme Court's narrow 5-4 decision to strike down a central component of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, "freeing nine states, mostly in the South," writes The New York Times, "to change their election laws without advance federal approval," is a welcome recognition that times have changed and that especially Southern states must not forever bear a "mark of Cain" for past discrimination against racial minorities.

Reaction from "civil rights groups" and liberal media outlets was predictable.

Writing in The Washington Post, Rep. John Lewis (D-Ga.) accused the Court of plunging "a dagger into the heart of the Voting Rights Act."

If the Supreme Court sees at least one of its past decisions in need of updating in light of progress on civil rights, shouldn't the greatest civil right of all -- the right to life -- be re-visited?

It's more like removing a dagger from the back of nine states and numerous counties, including Brooklyn, the Bronx and Manhattan.

The conservative Project 21 black leadership network, which was largely ignored by the media, had a different reaction. It maintains, "increased fairness" had accompanied "evolving racial opinions of the American people" and thus the Voting Rights Act, as written, is no longer necessary.

Cherylyn Harley LeBon, a former senior counsel to the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, said, "This ruling recognizes that people can change, that America has changed and that a law that presupposes guilt must be reformed to reflect the beauty of human nature."

Curt Levey, president of the Committee for Justice, said the law was a form of "geographic profiling" and was based on "outdated stereotypes."

The New York Times reports, "The decision had immediate practical consequences. Texas announced shortly after the decision that a voter identification law that had been blocked would go into effect immediately, and that redistricting maps there would no longer need federal approval."

Unlike in 1965, today there are numerous anti-discrimination laws on the books. If someone can prove they were denied the right to vote based on race, legal remedies can be pursued. Selma today, is not the Selma of 48 years ago. America has changed.

In another decision involving race, the Court "punted" on an affirmative action case, ordering lower courts to re-examine whether race-based admission policies at the University of Texas violate the rights of white applicants.

Abigail Fisher, who is white, sued the university when she was denied admission in 2008. She believed the denial was based on race.

The University of Texas argued its policies are designed to achieve greater "diversity."

ABC reports, "The justices ruled that the lower court should have required the university to prove that its program was narrowly tailored enough to produce the diversity objectives it was designed to achieve. They said 'race-neutral' options must be unworkable for race-based affirmative-action policies to stand."

The subtle bigotry in all of this is the attitude by too many liberals that racial minorities are in constant need of government help in order to achieve anything.

The fact that the "war on poverty" was lost long ago has been lost on those who seem frozen in time. That many born into difficult circumstances have overcome by hard work, avoiding teen pregnancy and not committing criminal acts never seems to be looked on as a lesson for others, but rather as an anomaly.

One element of the Supreme Court's ruling on the Voting Rights Act offers some hope when it comes to an equally outdated and wrong decision -- abortion.

If the Court recognizes the need for updating the Voting Rights Act, shouldn't Roe v. Wade be re-examined?

In light of medical advances that have made it possible for a child to survive outside the womb at much earlier stages, sonograms, born-alive legislation to protect babies who survive abortions and informed consent laws requiring full disclosure of abortion alternatives, should we really hold on to a ruling based on a 40-year-old legal case?

If the Court sees at least one of its past decisions in need of updating in light of progress on civil rights, shouldn't the greatest civil right of all -- the right to life -- be re-visited?



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Pain, uncertainty with my husband still imprisoned in Iran
byline: By Naghmeh Abedini


I would have never imagined that I would spend my ninth wedding anniversary – coming up on June 30th – alone, with my husband in captivity in Iran for his faith.

Nor could I have imagined that when Saeed and I said our vows for better or worse, just how those vows would be tested as I waited and prayed for my husband’s return to our family one year later.

On June 22, 2012, as I had so many times before, I kissed my husband goodbye in the early hours of the morning for what was intended to be a short trip to Iran to obtain the final approval from the Iranian government on a non-sectarian orphanage.

While our family was hopeful this trip would mark the opening of the doors to the orphans we had longed to make a part of our family, we were also excited for Saeed’s prompt return so we could get started on our summer plans. 

We had dreamed of a secure future in which our family would take the long-awaited trip to Disneyland Saeed had promised our son Jacob for his fifth birthday.

I could not have imagined that when Saeed and I said our vows for better or worse, just how those vows would be tested as I waited and prayed for my husband’s return to our family.

But two days before his hopeful return, the picture of our family’s future dramatically changed.

On July 28, 2012, Revolutionary Guards forced my husband off of a bus in Iran and put him under house arrest.

Suddenly, I was forced to trade certainty for uncertainty. My ideas and conceptions of the future were stripped of their relevance and value, and plans that I had no reason to change were forcefully overturned.

What would the future look like now?

For the last year, I have been traveling into a future that I once thought would follow some semblance of normalcy.

Life was now anything but normal.

The future became even more uncertain when, on September 26, 2012, my husband was forcibly taken to Evin prison – a place with memories that haunt our family. 

You see, when I was a young girl, my 18-year-old uncle was executed without warning in Evin prison because his political views differed from the new radical Regime. Our family knows all too well the uncertainty of Evin.

The only certainty I knew was hard to swallow: there would be no Disneyland for Jacob’s fifth birthday, not because I would not gladly take him, but because Jacob, with the tenacity of a young man beyond his years, said he would not go without Daddy. 

Saeed would miss our children’s first day of school, Thanksgiving, Christmas, Easter, and every memorable event in between.

For now, there would be no regular nightly routine of tucking our children into bed together or quiet moments shared between a husband and wife.

Even with Iran’s record of persecuting religious minorities, I never imagined my husband being arrested and sentenced to eight years in prison solely for his Christian faith. 

As I sit here today, I would give anything to see that picture of our family come together again. All the little things that define our family are treasures to me now.

I would not have chosen the future in which I have to dry my children's tears, and blink back my own, as I tell them I still don't know when Daddy is coming home—but this is our family picture now.

Yet, even as our hearts are strengthened as hundreds of thousands of people take up the global cause of my husband’s freedom, our family is faced with the brutal reality of his absence. 

Like hundreds of other families of Iranian prisoners of conscience, we face daily uncertainty.

There’s been much discussion already about how Hasan Rouhani, the new president-elect of Iran, will deal with the West – how he will deal with the many issues facing Iran.

Unfortunately, Rouhani, despite his reformist claims, does not offer any more certainty than his predecessor or any solace to me or my children.

While I hope for change, I cannot place my hope in one man. But I do pray the heart of the Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei, who ultimately controls Iran’s treatment of prisoners of conscience, is softened towards his people, towards my husband, and towards others being held captive because of their beliefs. 

I pray that the fog of uncertainty lifts to reveal a clear future, reuniting Saeed in the warm embrace of our family.





headline: What would George Washington do to NSA leaker Edward Snowden?
byline: By Logan Beirne


Our founding fathers faced men like Edward Snowden. They sentenced them to death.

After we won the Revolutionary War, many people continued to break the law, claiming they were merely perpetuating American ideals. Our first president and commander-in-chief, George Washington, condemned them.

In exposing the FSA’s surveillance program, Snowden claims to be a good American doing his part to expose government intrusion.

Our Founders likely would have prosecuted Edward Snowden to the fullest extent of the law.

The fact is that he intentionally broke U.S. law by leaking classified information and knowingly harmed our national security.

For doing so, our Founders likely would have prosecuted him to the fullest extent of the law.

While they had encouraged defiance against the British government during the war, after they won, they had little tolerance for disobedience against the new republic. This was because it was just to rebel against laws imposed without adequate representation, but once the American people gained representation, they were required to follow their own laws.

For example, when Daniel Shays and other farmers rose up against their unjust treatment at the hands of the Massachusetts legislature, they were crushed.

Despite Shays’ men’s honorable intentions and revolutionary rallying cry, “True Liberty and Justice may require resistance to law,” Washington had little sympathy.

“What gracious God, is man! that there should be such inconsistency and perfidiousness in his conduct?” he lamented, “It is but the other day, that we were shedding our blood to obtain the Constitutions under which we now live; Constitutions of our own choice and making; and now we are unsheathing the sword to overturn them.”

Following this rationale, Washington would vigorously pursue Snowden for breaking his nation’s laws and jeopardizing its national security.

Snowden had the option to contact his elected representatives in Congress, reach out to the courts, or pursue a variety of lawful channels.

He had the ability to protest what may very well be a deeply troubling program, without breaking the law and revealing sensitive information to our enemies. Instead of acting as a true patriot, Snowden leaked intelligence to a British newspaper and fled to China.

This is not to say the Founders would necessarily approve of the NSA programs, however. They would likely applaud efforts to keep a close watch on foreign nationals using all tools at our disposal; at the same time, they would take issue with the fact that untold thousands – or even millions -- of innocent American citizens are swept into the dragnet as well.

We fought a revolution to escape government intrusion. While we will surely learn more details about the NSA methods over the coming weeks, initial evidence of the programs’ indiscriminate techniques coupled with inadequate oversight, paints a picture analogous to the hated “writs of assistance” that led to the Revolutionary War.

America’s fierce aversion to these general warrants was a galvanizing force behind the creation of our constitutional republic.

The king had authorized agents to conduct wide ranging searches of anyone, anywhere, anytime.

If the agent was looking for weapons, for example, he could scour a town, searching every innocent man, woman, and child and their homes without any need to identify particular people for which he had legitimate reason to suspect.

Without court oversight or probable cause, these writs left it to the officials’ discretion, thereby placing “the liberty of every man in the hands of every petty officer.”

As Revolutionary commander-in-chief, George Washington was not shy about collecting intelligence, explaining that “It is by comparing a variety of information, we are frequently enabled to investigate facts, which were so intricate or hidden, that no single clue could have led to the knowledge of them.”

He ferociously hunted America’s enemies, using varied and ingenious methods to do so.

Analogously to the NSA programs, the Founders even intercepted the mail of Americans loyal to the crown. However, they were wary of abuses and sought to ensure transparent democratic oversight over the process rather than secretive national government agencies.

We should likewise be wary of creeping government intrusion and strive to ensure proper oversight.

While we may decide as a nation that the current NSA activities are far less intrusive than the general searches of yesteryear, these programs are worth our scrutiny due to the new precedents they set.

Times and technology will continue to change, but our values should not. We might look to Washington and our founding fathers for guidance on how to respond to security challenges while remaining faithful to our nation’s core constitutional principles.





headline: Sorry, Obama  Holder, Voting Rights Act decision is cause for celebration
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Talk about your disappointments. The first black president of the United States and the first black attorney general say they are deeply disappointed that the Supreme Court gutted the Voting Rights Act.

In fact, the ruling is worth celebrating. It reflects the success of the civil rights-era legislation in ending laws and practices aimed at denying blacks the right to vote. As chief Justice John Roberts noted in his majority opinion, two hotbeds of anti-black violence in those days, Selma, Ala., and Philadelphia, Miss., both have African-American mayors.

“Problems remain in these states and others, but there is no denying that, due to the Voting Rights Act, our nation has made great strides,” he wrote in the 5-4 decision.

Holder once called America “a nation of cowards” on race, but apparently wants a conversation only when he gets his way.

The act required that routine election changes in all or most of nine states and parts of others — including New York — get advance approval from the Justice Department. Opponents argued the law relied on data from 40 years ago and intruded on the states’ sovereignty.

Holder’s objections are especially galling. He once called America “a nation of cowards” on race, but apparently wants a conversation only when he gets his way.

The court correctly concluded that America’s race relations have changed dramatically since 1965, even if some who benefitted from those changes refuse to take yes for an answer.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's column in the New York Post, click here.





headline: My father, my hero
byline: By Robert L. Dilenschneider


Ask people about heroes, and you will hear a small number of names again and again. Martin Luther King, Jr. comes up a lot. So does Mother Theresa. And so do mom and dad, often for reasons that aren't clear to anyone other than their progeny.

The psychology behind that phenomenon is pretty obvious. Parents are more than our first role models. They are our first superpowers, our first gods.

Towering above us, these exalted beings hold our fate in their hands. They reward us, punish us, protect us, mystify us, and sacrifice for us. When we are small, they are heroes of the first rank. But as the years go by, they fall from grace in our eyes. To establish our own identities, we are forced to rebel and to look elsewhere for heroes.

Parents are more than our first role models. They are our first superpowers, our first gods.

But for many people, the deep-down longing for heroic parents persists. Even if our parents are almost entirely lacking heroic qualities, we honor their quieter virtues and cherish the few stories that cast them in a noble light.

It's no wonder that many people, given the chance to name their heroes, pick their parents first.

Of course, some parents really are heroes. Take, for example, my dad.

His name was Sigmund John Dilenschneider, otherwise known as "Dil." He was born in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, the son of a weaver.

He grew up with virtually no money. When his friends went to college, he went to work and saved what he could.

He didn't get to college until he was well into his twenties, years after his friends had moved on to other things.

He graduated from the Wharton School in Philadelphia, where he met my mother. But this was in the midst of the Depression, and money was tight. Even after they got married, they couldn't live together because he couldn't afford an apartment.

Finally my dad got a job at a newspaper and his career began. He worked for the Philadelphia Inquirer and the Philadelphia Bulletin.

Then he moved to New York and got a job with Scripps-Howard. He ended up in Ohio, working for the Cleveland Press and finally the Columbus Citizen.

That's where he was when the story I'm about to tell took place. I was very young at the time, but I remember it well.

It began when the phone rang. To my surprise, my dad took the call in the basement.

Unbeknownst to him, I was huddled beneath the basement steps in a favorite hiding spot of mine, listening to the whole thing.

I don't know how much I understood at the time, but I'll never forget the drama and tension surrounding the whole event.

Later on, my parents filled me in on the details.

The call came from a local department store called Cousins Fern. Cousins Fern was then a major retailer in Columbus, Ohio. Its advertising support kept the paper alive. But they had a problem: The store's CEO or founder, I don't remember which, had just committed suicide. The person on the phone wanted my dad to keep the story out of the paper.

My dad said he couldn't do that. He promised to present the story respectfully and not trumpet it across the first page. But they had to treat it as news, he said, because it was important. He reiterated that point a couple of times. A long silence followed. It turned out the guy on the other end of the phone had threatened to withdraw all the Cousins Fern advertising if my dad published the story.

This could easily have destroyed the paper. But my dad didn't flinch. He said, "I'm sorry, I've got to do it, and I hope you'll be able to understand why I've got to do it, and I hope we'll retain your advertising." Then he hung up and went upstairs. I followed.

The next day, two things happened. The story ran in the paper, just as my father had said it would. And Cousins Fern withdrew all of its advertising.

Freedom of speech wasn't a meaningless phrase to my father. A newspaperman through and through, he wasn't willing to compromise on that. To this day, I am tremendously proud that he took that stance.

Fortunately, he didn't have to pay the consequences, though he was willing to.

Two or three days later, a guy named Fred Lazarus, the founder of the Federated Department Store chain, called my father and asked him to come over to his office. My dad went.

As he told the story, he and Fred Lazarus sat on an elegant French couch and sipped demitasse coffee from delicate China cups. Fred Lazarus said he was surprised that Cousins Fern had decided not to advertise in the paper any longer. That meant Lazarus could increase his own advertising commitment to the paper. In fact, he said, he wanted to put Cousins Fern out of business.

Which is precisely what happened. Lazarus doubled his advertising commitment; my dad's paper was safe; Cousins Fern folded; and Lazarus went on to become Federated.

That wasn't the only time my father stood up for freedom of the press.

There was always the issue of which columnists were going to be published in the paper. Scripps-Howard had an annual meeting at which all the papers came together and decided which candidates to support in the next election. Their politics were middle-of-the-road.

The Dispatch, which was the other paper in town, was highly conservative -- they were so tight they squeaked -- and my dad always felt it was important to represent another point of view.

Accordingly, he filled the pages of the Citizen with liberal columnists. In a conservative town like Columbus, that was not a popular thing. But it was his view that a newspaper should offer alternative points of view, and he didn't care if he took a lot of criticism as a result.

I must note another heroic aspect of my dad: Even when he was provoked, he made a point of getting along with everyone who worked for him.

One time, the pressmen went on strike. Those were the days of hot linotype. Using hot type was a noisy, dangerous process. The Linotype operators wore gloves in case they caught the hot type. You had to have gloves.

One day, my dad, who represented management, went down to the composing floor and one of the Linotype operators threw some hot type at him. It bounced off his chest and shoulder and fell to the floor. When it stopped sizzling, he picked it up and handed it back to the Linotype operator.

He said to him, "You might want to remelt this lead because if we don't, it's going to cost us money and we won't be able to give you the raise you deserve."

The guy was trying to start a fight. My wise father refused to take the bait. He believed in civility -- and negotiation.

He was quite a figure. He was a religious man who never had a bad thing to say about anybody. He reached out to people all over the community and was always involved in civic activities.

He was a strong believer in education.

He was not a big spender. He had only one suit -- a blue one, which he wore every day because he couldn't afford another.

On Saturdays, he would take the suit to Swan Cleaners for a dry cleaning. At some point, my mother would announce that his suit was getting shiny, and he would buy a new one.

In my memory, there was never an overlap between the old suit and the new one. My father was always a one-suit man. The old one, suffering from advanced old age, was retired. The new one immediately took its place.

My dad was also heroic as a father.

For example, I wasn't a very good baseball player. Because he knew baseball mattered to me, he got me some special instruction, bought me a better mitt, and did everything he could to help.

When I was hitting, he was there celebrating. When I was not hitting, he would never say a word.

I remember one of the most devastating moments of my life. I was at bat, and I struck out. And as I walked back from the plate, I saw my father parked in the car about fifty yards away from the ballpark.

He had seen me strike out. But he never mentioned it, never humiliated me.

He was that kind of guy.

I try to keep his example in mind.

My dad wasn't emotionally expressive, and he didn't tell my brother and me what to do. He helped us reach our own conclusions.

He encouraged. He helped us develop our own talents, and he gave us the tools to do it.

He also took great pride and pleasure in our achievements. That made a big difference. I don't know if that's heroic or not, but it made me feel pretty good and proud to call him my father.

On the day when I left home for my first job, my dad performed one of his most heroic actions: He came home for lunch.

Now, I have to say that my dad was always working. He put in long hours at the paper. He never came home in the middle of the day.

But on the day when I was preparing to leave Ohio and go to New York for my first real job, he came home at noontime. It was highly irregular.

He sat down at the kitchen table with me and we had tuna fish sandwiches. For a few minutes, we hardly said anything. Then he looked at me and said, "This is a big thing that's going to happen now. You're going to go off, and I want you to be very successful and do what you want to do. But I want you also to know that if things don't work out, I'm here for you. All you have to do is call me."

He meant it. And I knew it.

A stranger might not fully understand this, but when my dad came home for lunch that day, it was a heroic gesture. It fortified me at a critical moment in my young life.

I hope to provide the same sense of support for my kids some day.





headline: Obama’s climate change plan masks hidden agenda
byline: By Peter Morici


President Obama’s climate change action plan won’t do much to curb global warming, but it will please liberals who delight in extending government control over large segments of the economy.

The president argues that the overwhelming majority of scientists, including some early skeptics, agree the planet is warming and greenhouse gas emissions are the primary culprit. As CO2 composes 80 percent of those gases, Obama targets coal-fired electric utilities and opportunities to reduce fuel use in heavy transportation.

The president proposes reducing U.S. emissions by 17 percent from 2005 levels through strict EPA regulation and oversight, when the market forces are already accomplishing that goal without imposing a command and control regime. 

No one can reasonably believe that China can be persuaded to rearrange its entire automobile and electrical generation industries to suit the predilections of American environmentalists

In 2011, the last year data is available, U.S. greenhouse gas emissions were already down 8.5 percent from 2005. Simply put, by responding to changing consumer preferences, Detroit started making more fuel efficient vehicles even before the president started phasing in tougher mileage standards in 2012.

Recently, more abundant and cheaper natural gas inspired electric utilities to start switching out of coal where most cost effective.

If current trends continue, as is likely, these market driven adjustments in U.S. energy use will take America's greenhouse gases well below the president’s target by 2020 without needless and costly government intervention.

If left alone, the power sector in the Midwest, for example, will continue to phase out coal in most cost efficient ways—by strategically replacing it with natural gas, and purchasing nuclear, hydro and other renewal power from other parts of the country. This will keep down electric utility rates.

Instead, the president will micro-manage the process by imposing strict and inflexible requirements on each electric utility similar to corporate fuel economy standards now imposed on car and light truck manufacturers. This will limit flexibility, result in the overuse of natural gas, and unnecessarily raise both natural gas and electricity prices to manufacturers, other commercial users, and homeowners.

Similarly, competition from rail, complemented by short-haul light trucks, already imposes pressures on long-haul trucking companies and heavy truck manufactures to conserve fuel in the most cost effective ways. But the president’s program will micro manage their efforts out of the EPA, and raise the cost of moving goods around the country without cutting CO2 emissions very much.

All this will make U.S. manufacturing and other commercial enterprises less competitive and send more jobs to China, where businesses pollute with reckless abandon.

With an economy about half the size, China already emits twice the greenhouse gases as either the United States or Europe. Every three years, its emissions grow enough to replace the savings the United States would accomplish over 15 years. Other developing countries, like India, are similarly adding to the problem.

The president proposes to bring China and other nations along through diplomacy, but he has not be able to obtain Beijing’s cooperation on the value of the yuan, cyber-piracy or even detaining Eric Snowden.

No one can reasonably believe China can be persuaded to rearrange its entire automobile and electrical generation industries to suit the predilections of American environmentalists—especially when American approaches to regulation are delivering growth at less than one-third the pace accomplished in the Middle Kingdom.

The president wants the new EPA standards for power plants finalized by June of 2015 and implemented in 2016. This hasty time table is necessary to lock in a new regime before its wisdom is debunked and another round of negotiations with China, India and others fail.

Global warming will go unmitigated, and U.S. economic growth and jobs creation will be further harmed; however, the president’s desired legacy will be served. As with Obama are, the scope of command and control over the private economy will be extended.





headline: Abortion doctor guilty verdict hardly a victory
byline: By Tamara Holder


The Kermitt Gosnell verdict is hardly a victory. Out of 7 charges of first degree murder to unborn babies, Gosnell was only found guilty of three. Of one charge of third degree murder to an abortion patient, Gosnell was found guilty of a lesser charge of involuntary manslaughter. A 38 percent (3/8) is a failing grade.

The Pennsylvania doctor’s West-Philadelphia practice was prominently located on a busy street corner, smack-dab in the middle of town. Even though he presumably ran an illegal operation for decades, it was not until February of 2010 that law enforcement finally discovered Gosnell's constantly-eroding crime scene.

The raid was not related to the investigation of murder, infanticide, or illegal abortions. For example, the raid had nothing to do with a complaint received by the Pennsylvania Department of Health regarding a Gosnell abortion in 2007. The baby girl was allegedly viable and of 30-weeks’ gestation.

Nor was it related to an investigation of Gosnell’s patients’ dying of pain-killer overdoses prescribed by him after he performed an abortion.

The raid was not related to the 46 lawsuits that were filed against him by his victims, or to the numerous complaints that people had made to state officials for years. It was not related to the spread of STD's due to Gosnell's use of contaminated instruments or that he lefts remnants of an abortion inside of his patients.

No, the raid was actually related to a prescription drug dealing operation.

The raid revealed freezers full of “discarded fetuses, and medical waste was piled up in the basement.” The grand jury transcript stated that one of Gosnell’s employees assisted him in performing 13 of 31 illegal abortions. But because the raid opened Pandora’s Box beyond anything expected, much of the evidence had eroded and investigators were unable to determine if all of the frozen remains were the result of illegal abortions.

Instead, the prosecution only ended up with seven counts of first-degree murder in that he “regularly and illegally delivered live, viable, babies in the third trimester of pregnancy -- and then murdered these newborns by severing their spinal cords with scissors.”

Gosnell also charged with one count of third degree murder of Kamamaya Mongar who received an abortion at the clinic in 2009 and died shortly thereafter of a pain-killer overdose prescribed to her by the clinic.

The prosecution presented its case over a period of five weeks, calling former staff members to the stand, in addition to showing graphic photos of babies recovered during the search of Gosnell’s clinic. The staff members testified that they saw the babies move and/or breathe; however, Gosnell’s defense attorney argued that these observations, although disturbing and heart-wrenching, were not scientific proof that the babies were born alive. Additionally, Gosnell called no witnesses to testify in his defense.

In 1973, Roe v. Wade made abortion legal, primarily in response to back-alley abortions. Women were finally able to terminate a pregnancy through safe and sanitary procedures administered by a legitimate doctor. Women no longer had to risk their lives by terminating a pregnancy in the bathroom with a coat hanger or visiting scam artists who used painful and risky techniques.

Pro-life or pro-choice, today women can legally obtain an abortion. Pro-life or pro-choice, today doctors can legally perform an abortion so long as it is within the state’s legal term limit.

The case against Gosnell is grotesque but the prosecution had a major hurdle because only the staff, non-medical experts, testified that they observed the late-term babies breathing and moving. The non-medical evidence and testimony was so weak that during the trial, the judged dismissed the following three first degree murder charges:

The grand jury report contained 281-pages of information yet, at the end of the trial, the jury was asked to determine whether Gosnell was guilty of only four murder charges to babies (and a fifth charge of third degree murder, as mentioned above). Just four. Even with seemingly obvious evidence of Gosnell’s guilt, it still took the jury 10 days to deliberate. At one point, there was even a period when the jury was deadlocked on two charges.

Of the four first degree murder charges, he was only found guilty of three murders to Baby A, Baby C, and Baby D. He was found not guilty of the murder of Baby E, even though prosecutors presented evidence that Baby E “let out a wimper” after the abortion. Gosnell was not found guilty of third degree murder of Ms. Mongar but instead of involuntary manslaughter, a far less serious crime.

The Gosnell case is definitely about the heartless murders of three unborn babies at the hands of Gosnell. But just as importantly, it is about the health and safety of women, and the public’s demand that, regardless of one’s moral beliefs about abortion, the government cannot not continue to fail us by turning a blind eye to mass murderers who commit hundreds of crimes over a period of decades while operating in plain view.

The Gosnell case proves that we must not only protect viable babies from murdering abortion doctors but we must also force prompt responses so that prosecutors have enough evidence to receive an guilty verdict for every single murdered baby, not just the lucky few.





headline: Fidelity to the Constitution when we need it
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


When former spy Edward Snowden revealed to the world that the federal government is spying on most Americans, most Americans were surprised and unhappy. But half of official Washington yawned before it roared. Somehow the people in the government had a pretty good idea of what government spies are doing, and they more or less approve of it -- but not all of them.

Politicians as diverse as Republican Speaker John Boehner and Democratic Sen. Dianne Feinstein called Snowden a traitor. So did former Vice President Dick Cheney, and President Obama said that for once Cheney’s words were music to his ears.

On the other hand, former Democratic Congressman Dennis Kucinich, Republican Sen. Rand Paul, my Fox News colleague Bill O’Reilly and I have all referred to Snowden as a hero.

When confronted with conflicting oaths, Edward Snowden opted for the higher good: fidelity to the supreme law of the land. 

What did Snowden do that has those in power screaming for his scalp and those -- generally -- who fear the loss of liberty, including millions of young people, grateful for his courage?

The NSA is America’s domestic spying apparatus. Its budget is secret. It will soon occupy the largest federal building on the planet. It often hires outside contractors to do much of its work. One of those contractors is Booz Allen Hamilton. Booz Allen’s co-chair is former Admiral John M. McConnell, who once headed the NSA. When Snowden began his work for Booz Allen, he took two oaths. The first oath was to keep secret the classified materials to which he would be exposed in his work as a spy; the second oath was to uphold the Constitution.

Shortly after Snowden began his work with the NSA, he came to the realization that he could not comply with both oaths. He realized that by keeping secret what he learned, he was keeping the American public in the dark about what its government is doing outside the Constitution in order to control the public.

What is it doing?

The government persuaded a federal judge with a perverse understanding of the values and history and language of the Constitution to sign a series of orders directing the largest telephone company in the U.S. and the largest Internet providers in the world to make available to the government’s prying eyes all sorts of information about nearly all of us, thus allowing the feds to monitor our use of land line and wireless phones, as well as our use of emails and texts.

The numbers are staggering.

Verizon has greater than 113,000,000 U.S. customers who generate or receive more than one billion phone calls every day. Americans text and email one another using the services of Microsoft, Google, Yahoo, Facebook and others many billions of times every day.

The judge’s order was profoundly unconstitutional, as is the section of the Patriot Act that authorized it.

The Constitution requires that the government demonstrate to all judges being asked to sign search warrants specific evidence of criminal behavior contained in the things to be seized. And it requires that the warrants themselves particularly describe the places to be searched or the persons or things to be seized.

In this case, the things being seized consist of digital data about nearly everyone in America, which in the hands of a skilled spy can be used to monitor our physical movements and communications and, according to former CIA Director David Petraeus, to predict them.

The Patriot Act facilitates these dragnets by unconstitutionally reducing the standard for the issuance of search warrants. The president, who refuses to deny that his spies possess the content of our communications, claims they are not listening to it or reading it.

Who would believe President Obama?

One of the spies who knew the power he and his fellow spies had and who had access to the innermost thoughts of hundreds of millions of us -- and who disbelieved the president -- was Edward Snowden.

Snowden realized the unconstitutional nature of what the government was doing and concluded that he could not be faithful to both of his oaths.

One of those oaths -- to retain secrets -- is grounded in a federal statute that requires secrecy and punishes the exposure of secrets.

The other oath is grounded in the Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land and protects the natural right to be left alone and does not punish the governmental violation of that right.

When confronted with the conflicting oaths, Snowden opted for the higher good: fidelity to the supreme law of the land.

Hence, in order to protect the privacy of us all, Snowden violated the lesser oath and upheld the greater one.

He could not serve two masters when the lesser of the two (fidelity to the government’s laws) facilitated a corruption of the greater of the two (the primacy to the Constitution).

He’s a traitor, the establishment roared. He’s a high school dropout. He left the Army. He admits to having lots of sex with his girlfriend. He fled to Hong Kong.

Who cares?

He understands, as Ronald Reagan did, that if we don’t control the government, the government will control us.

That’s why the Washington establishment yawned when we learned what it knew and now roars because Snowden challenged it.

Those in power want to stay there and will misuse the Constitution to do so for as long as they can get away with it, no matter to which political party they belong. Any government that secretly spies on nearly all the population is aiming to control the population.

Snowden knew that this massive violation of the constitutionally guaranteed rights of nearly every American, orchestrated and operated in secrecy, is corrupting the Constitution and empowering the corruptors. It was that understanding plus a willingness to face down those in power who lack fidelity to the Constitution and who can do him harm that constituted the behavior of a hero.

Is he flawed?

The only hero who was not flawed was nailed to a tree 2,000 years ago because those He came into the world to save rejected Him.





headline: Will Hillary in 2016 be more like Bill Clinton, Barack Obama or someone else?
byline: By Liz Peek


Have the Clintons decided that the Obama brand is kaput? That could be why former President Bill Clinton recently criticized President Obama’s timid engagement with Syria. With Obama’s approval ratings dropping, and Hillary gearing up to run for president, it’s possible the Clintons have decided to put a little distance between the former first lady and the current first man.

It’s a smart move, on many fronts. Americans are tiring of our professorial president. In particular, a recent CNN/Research poll showed only 37% of independents now approve of the job Mr. Obama is doing -- a swift 10-point drop.

Perhaps most significant is that for the first time the public is souring on the president’s character -- with less than half now judging him trustworthy and honest. The Clintons are not stupid -- after sucking much sustenance from the Secretary of State gig (remember the embarrassing farewell interview with Steve Kroft), they may have decided to break for the hills.

People tend to confuse Hillary with husband Bill. President Clinton is a liberal, but he is a pragmatist and worked successfully across the aisle. 

There’s another reason Hillary might choose to remove herself from the Obama aura. She will soon have to run on her record.

Our lack of progress in dealings with Iran, North Korea or Middle East foes Israel and Palestine, our chilly relations with Russia and China and the unfolding tragedy in Syria begs the question – what exactly did our Secretary of State accomplish?

Racking up miles traveled does not position someone to occupy the White House – or Delta would be a better training ground than the Senate.

No, Hillary will have to run on her long and impressive CV. It would be better for her to deposit today’s foreign policy fiascos on Obama’s door, and husband Bill nicely took the necessary first step.

Mrs. Clinton has other issues, of course – Benghazi and hints of cover-ups of big-wig misdeeds at State come to mind. But despite the lame run at State and a drop in her-once towering approval ratings, enthusiasm on the left runs high, even intemperate.

Why does everyone consider Hillary such a rock-solid sure bet? (Such a sure bet that the highly ambitious New York Governor Andrew Cuomo supposedly will not contest her right to the throne.)

Mainly because she’s not Obama. Democrats disappointed in President Obama tend to love Mrs. Clinton. If only we had elected Hillary they say, sotto voce – we wouldn’t be creeping slow-motion through this recovery, we wouldn’t have gridlock in Congress, we would have leadership.

But, these people tend to confuse Hillary with husband Bill. President Clinton is a liberal, but he pivoted when he had to, is a pragmatist, and worked successfully across the aisle.

He collaborated with his opponents to give us a robust economy and a balanced budget. Bill Clinton is a masterful politician, and there’s no doubt that Hillary learned from his example.

But Hillary Clinton, who describes herself as a “modern progressive,” is as much the ideologue as Mr. Obama. Remember that she sacrificed her first-lady influence on the altar of universal healthcare.

This is the Wellesley student who wrote her senior thesis on Saul Alinsky, (a thesis that was sealed while she was in the White House, overturning long-standing Wellesley tradition) and who nearly went to work for the godfather of community activism after graduation.

Mike Kelly, writing in The New York Times Magazine in 1993, describes Clinton this way: “By the time she graduated from Wellesley to head on to Yale Law School, Hillary Rodham had become a radical, in the true sense of the word: dedicated to the imperative of profound societal change, and confident in her own ability to direct that change.”

That urge to change America is not the only ambition she shares with Mr. Obama. Like the president, Hillary has long wanted to use taxes to narrow the divide between rich and poor.

She shares with Mr. Obama a disdain for the private sector, and for market solutions.

This is the woman who, in 1990, lobbied Congress in favor of a centralized system of child care even as the National Governor's Association, chaired by husband Bill, pushed for a more market-oriented system.

Campaigning on solutions to the mortgage fiasco, she summoned her inner Elizabeth Warren, focusing on “cracking down on unscrupulous brokers who lure unsuspecting families into unfair mortgages” and “prohibiting all prepayment penalties on all mortgages.”

Unimaginably, in the teeth of the meltdown, she proposed that we “expand the role also played by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac..” Expand the role?

Like Obama, Clinton is a champion of organized labor, once suggesting “I believe we can help more workers join unions to improve wages and conditions in our workplaces for jobs that cannot be shipped overseas.”

It never occurred to her that maybe unions had contributed to the outflow of jobs from the U.S. by driving up wages; like Obama, Clinton blames greedy corporations.

Along with President Obama, Clinton thinks something is quite wrong in the United States. Several years ago she made a widely ridiculed speech in which she described America as suffering from a "sleeping sickness of the soul." She observed a "sense that somehow economic growth and prosperity, political democracy and freedom are not enough.”

In her commencement address to her Wellesley graduating class of 1969, Clinton said the "prevailing, acquisitive and competitive corporate life is not the way of life for us…."

This sounds like Obama addressing Arizona State graduates, scorning those who might “chase after the usual brass rings: being on this "who's who" list or that top 100 list; how much money you make and how big your corner office is…”

And who does this Clinton quote remind you of? “Now, we have seen for more than a century that fairness doesn't just happen. It requires the right government policies.”

Hillary Clinton needs to distance herself from Obama, but not for the obvious reason that he is in trouble.

If they do their homework, voters may discover that Mrs. Clinton walks in Obama’s philosophical footsteps. Americans think voting for Hillary will bring back Bill’s 1990s, but electing her could instead prolong the Obama agony.



Liz Peek is a writer who contributes frequently to FoxNews.com. She is a financial columnist who also writes for The Fiscal Times. For more visit LizPeek.com. Follow her on Twitter@LizPeek.



headline: A compass for the road of life: Top 10 lessons I learned from Mom
byline: By John McManus


Mom. Just saying the word conjures a kaleidoscope of feelings, thoughts and memories. This woman did far more than change your diapers – she put years of time and effort to prepare you for a life marked by happiness, success and, when necessary, consolation. These ladies are weaving the fabric of society, and on May 12th, our nation comes together to celebrate the most important job that exists -- being a mother.

My mother taught me more life lessons than I can count -- and sometimes even put into words. But there are a core set of invaluable takeaways as her child that I strive to pass along to my own children and the hundreds of households I’ve worked with over the past two decades as an estate planning lawyer and family wealth counselor. Here are “The Top 10 Things I’ve Learned from Mom”:

1. You only have one chance to make a good first impression – be friendly and dress up. Mom was Miss NYC in her youth, and also a performer, particularly a professional singer. Mom taught us that everyday was a new audition, every relationship an uninitiated audience ready to be entertained.

2. Compliment people all the time – it makes them feel good and you, too. When we were kids, and even today, Mom always makes a point to compliment others. Whether the waiter at dinner, our teacher, or the person at the front desk of the hotel, they always smiled, but I know that Mom’s joy grew in greater proportion to the compliment given.

3. As a parent, focus on each child – in the end, you are only as happy as your least happy child. We all needed Mom more than our other siblings at various points in our lives. Until we all were happy mom was not happy, which meant more food for the hungriest, more care for the most ill.

4. Live a life forging ahead. “There will be time for rest later” Mom would say as we drove from school to basketball then to church. Mom taught us to push through fatigue -- in the end endurance is the key to success.

5. Talk about your family history – a lot. Don’t be afraid to tell the same story twice. No one else is writing books about your family’s tales and triumphs. Mom strove to leave an indelible impression on her children. She showed us why our roots are unique and gave us pride in our family name. Today Mom brags to her grandchildren how great their parents are. In this way, Mom reinforces reasons to admire Mom and Dad, strengthening respect for the family legacy.

6. Family starts with taking care of each other. My dad is so appreciative of my Mom’s support, care and encouragement that enabled him to have a fulfilling career with the same company for 60 years. My Mom also looked after her mother until she was 95 -- whenever we moved, Nana moved too…we were never more than five minutes away. My grandmother was lucky to have my mother and vice-versa; they were best friends.

7. Regret often stems from failing to take a risk. Pursue your passions, step outside of your comfort zone -- many of your limits are self-imposed, and you can transcend them to reach your goals. Mom would say, “If you take a risk and win, it was worthwhile. If you take a risk and lose, you’ve learned a lesson.” The only true failure comes from lack of trying.

8. Work hard, very hard – but not too hard. Mom grew up with her father’s assiduous work ethic; he built a national business from a single truck. Mom taught us that diligent work was essential, but never before family. While she never begrudged my dad for working late or missing dinner during the week, Mom held weekends, family vacation and children’s special events as absolute necessities.

9. Sing out loud! Mom had a singing career through her 20s. Whether in the car, or at church singing always brings her much happiness. Mom would say, when it comes to doing what gives you joy, don’t hum…sing out loud! Don’t just sing alone, but among others. Let them see your passion, but also recognize the unique passions of others singing their own song.

10. Keep the faith. My mother has been a churchgoer her whole life. Whenever the struggles hit, Mom always counted on her faith and the power of prayer. Going to church on Sundays gives her the greatest joy. Speaking with the churchgoers afterwards is equally rich to Mom. Refer back to your belief basics and think positively to create the life that you want.

Moms across the map have lovingly devoted themselves to imparting lessons that provide a compass on the road of life. The legacy of family values you hold close today started generations ago. On Sunday, as you take the time to stop and say thanks to the woman you call “Mom,” recognize not only what she’s taught you, but also that she’s prepared you to add to the legacy.



headline: Yes, Virginia, there really is a way to balance the budget
byline: By Douglas E. Schoen, Jessica Tarlov


President Obama is set to propose his “compromise” budget plan on Wednesday. His budget is reported to trim the deficit by $1.8 trillion over the next ten years, with nearly $600 billion in savings coming from additional revenue and $1.2 trillion coming from domestic program and entitlement cuts.

To be sure, his proposal offers Republicans more entitlement reform than before – a move that many on the left are against. But the President’s proposal still includes $580 billion in new taxes on the wealthy, a position that Republicans have consistently and unwaveringly opposed since taxes went up as a result of the fiscal cliff deal in January. It follows that we are still on the same long, hard path to a grand bargain. And this week brings yet another proposal that does little to get us there.

But new survey data, collected and financed by Douglas E. Schoen, LLC and in collaboration with the Campaign to Fix the Debt, shows a path towards a deal and how one can be reached.

There remains a solid majority willing to rein in entitlements—so long as voters believe that there will also be economic growth and job creation along with fiscal stability.

The American people are in a profoundly pessimistic and angry mood. The Republican Party’s approval ratings stand at a 20-year low, with 66 percent judging it unfavorably compared to 33 percent favorably. The Democrats are viewed in a more favorable light, but are still not in good stead (43 percent favorable to 53 percent unfavorable).

Fifty-two percent of voters believe the country is off on the wrong track, and 50 percent say the same about the economy. Close to a majority say we will not be able to balance the budget anytime soon.

Against this backdrop, Democrats and Republicans have offered up competing budget proposals—the Democrats in the Senate, the Republicans in the House—to address the nation’s mounting fiscal challenges.

The two budgets are roughly $1 trillion apart on taxes and $750 billion apart on military spending over the next ten years. They are fundamentally at odds on Medicare and entitlement reform as well as deficit reduction: the Republican plan would balance the budget over the next 10 years, while the Democratic plan reduces the deficit to an amount equivalent to 2.2% of GDP by 2023.

With such stark differences, it’s no surprise that the plans have had a polarizing effect—we face, yet again, a seemingly intractable budget stalemate in Washington. Neither side wants to compromise. And Americans are enthusiastic about neither plan.

Our new poll shows that Americans view the Republican plan, which makes draconian spending cuts and fundamentally alters Medicare, favorably, but only by a tepid 46-37 margin. By a broader margin (56-31), they favor the Democratic plan, but neither plan inspired much confidence in our respondents.

When we asked whether they thought that either the Democrats or Republicans had a realistic plan to reduce the deficit, just 20 percent said that the Republicans did, while 25 percent said that the Democrats did. But 49 percent believe that neither side has a realistic plan.

So what do the American people want? It’s clear. They want a bipartisan, compromise plan. By an overwhelming margin—80 percent to 8—our respondents support the new Simpson-Bowles plan, which cuts wasteful spending, reforms our outdated tax code, and makes the necessary changes to entitlements such as Medicare and Social Security in order to protect them for future generations of Americans.

This plan would reduce our debt by $2.4 trillion.

In practice, this new version of Simpson-Bowles raises close to $1.3 trillion through tax reform including the fiscal-cliff deal. It saves $600 billion from health-care programs and generates $600 billion in new tax revenue from ending or curbing deductions and breaks. And it makes $1.3 trillion in cuts to discretionary spending.

The plan stood up to scrutiny. When we told respondents that it would cut their Medicare and Social Security, they still supported it, 56 percent to 24 percent. What’s more, when we said that cuts to Medicare and Social Security would only affect higher income retirees, including millionaires, the plan’s support increased, with 65 percent in favor and 20 percent opposed.

Our survey respondents showed a strong desire here for a broad-scale deal that will reduce the debt and deficit, cut spending, and reform the tax code. Indeed, there remains a solid majority willing to rein in entitlements—so long as voters believe that there will also be economic growth and job creation (which remains their highest priority), along with fiscal stability.

To date, very few surveys have examined this issue in any great detail, comparing the actual details of the Democratic, Republican, and compromise plan and gauging American attitudes. Our findings offer compelling evidence that, while there is a great divide between the two parties, what the public wants is a clear, bipartisan fix to our nation’s fiscal situation.

Contrary to all of the doomsaying in Washington and the pervasive message that finding a solution is impossible, there is a clear path to a balanced budget, to deficit and debt reduction, and to achieving fiscal well-being. The results of our poll unequivocally show this. But the question remains whether the nation’s political leadership will put aside their partisan differences for a chance at the real agreement that the American people strongly support.



Douglas E. Schoen has served as a pollster for President Bill Clinton and is currently working with New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg. He has more than 30 years experience as a pollster and political consultant. He is also a Fox News contributor and co-host of "Fox News Insiders" Sundays on Fox News Channel and Mondays at 10:30 am ET on FoxNews.com Live. He is the author of ten books including,“Hopelessly Divided: The New Crisis in American Politics and What it Means for 2012 and Beyond” (Rowman and Littlefield 2012). Follow Doug on Twitter @DouglasESchoen.





headline: Our economy has heroes, too, let's honor our 'financial first responders'
byline: By Wayne Allyn Root


It is easy to understand why the U.S. economy is in crisis and decline. Forget the delusional stock market (fueled by Fed fake money printing). On Main Street our economy is sick and getting sicker.

There are no jobs.

Our country has 90 million working-age, able-bodied Americans are not working -- that’s almost one third of the country.

The workforce participation rate is the lowest in decades.

Financial First Responders risk their money to create jobs, to provide a better life for their employees, and to provide products that consumers need at a price they can afford.

The rate of business startups is the lowest in decades. Food stamps, disability, welfare, and Medicaid are at record highs.

We face economic disaster.

Why?

The answer is found in how we treat the heroes of the economy. Fireman are heroes because they run into burning buildings. Policeman are heroes because they run towards the sound of gunshots. That’s why they are called First Responders. Where would we be in a crisis without these heroes?

But our economy relies on heroes, too. I call these heroes "Financial First Responders."

They are the business owners, investors, job creators, and taxpayers. They risk their financial lives, just as policeman and fireman risk their bodies.

They run towards crisis, just like our First Responders.

They are willing to risk their life savings on nothing but a business idea.

Amazing! They even risk their money in the midst of an economic crisis. That takes guts.

Like fireman and policeman, who risk their lives selflessly for others, the Financial First Responders risk their money to create jobs, to provide a better life for their employees, and to provide products that consumers need at a price they can afford.

Their courageous risk-taking is what fuels the entire U.S. economy -- thereby paying the taxes necessary to fund government. Without Financial First Responders the economy and government would grind to a halt.

Obama famously said, “You didn’t build that” to business owners. That statement could be the most ignorant ever uttered by a president.

The truth is the exact opposite.

Nothing could get built by government without the risks taken by business owners. The reason we have roads, highways, bridges, airports, schools and hospitals is the tax dollars paid by Financial First Responders.

Yet while government praises traditional "First Responders" like firemen and policeman, Obama and his socialist cabal demonize, denigrate, and disrespect Financial First Responders.

For our courage and heroic risk-taking we get kicked in the gut.

We are targeted, punished, regulated and taxed to death for our success…and now we’re even persecuted by the IRS.

Next time you wonder why the U.S. economy is failing, just remember that President Obama has created a hostile work environment.

Just remember the 80/20 rule. 80% of success at any business comes from the top 20% of superstar employees.

The same holds true of government. Whether it's Merrill Lynch, or Coldwell Banker, or Charles Schwab, or Facebook, or the state of New Jersey, or the federal government, success is dependent on the rainmakers. The top 20% produce 80% of your profit, pay 80% of your bills.

How do you motivate the rainmakers? It's simple -- the more these superstars produce, the more they get to keep. In any industry in the world, the superstars at the top keep more of what they earn. Plus, they receive bonuses, fancy dinners, vacations, gifts, golf.

Can you imagine if a company came along that reversed that idea. What if this company treated the top 20% like crap.

What if they punished them -- the more they make, the less they keep!

What if this company took away all the extra commissions and bonuses of these superstars…and redistributed the money to the worst 20% of employees.

Can you imagine giving nothing to your superstars, but offering fancy dinners, golf, gifts, and trips around the world to the worst performers?

How absurd. That company would be out of business in 30 days.

Don’t look now, but it’s happening. It's called government.

Under Obama the rules have been reversed. He punishes the superstars at the top for our success. He taxes us to death.

The more you make, the less you keep.

He puts in place so many rules and regulations, that it is impossible to run our businesses anymore. The Financial First Responders are now condemned and punished for our heroism.

Capitalism is under attack.

That is why the U.S. economy is failing. There is only one way to save this country and turnaround this economy...

Celebrate and reward the Financial First Responders.



Wayne Allyn Root is capitalist evangelist, entrepreneur, and Libertarian-conservative Republican. He is a former Libertarian vice presidential nominee. Wayne's latest book is "The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide: Secrets to Protecting Your Family, Your Finances, and Your Freedom." For more, visit his website: www.ROOTforAmerica.com. Follow him on Twitter@WayneRoot.



headline: Hasan Rowhani is no moderate on Iran's nuclear weapons program
byline: By Amb. John Bolton


Within days of Hasan Rowhani’s election as Iran’s president, the White House and several European governments were already ecstatic at the possibility of resuming negotiations over Tehran’s nuclear-weapons program. 

Of course, Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei and the Iranian Revolutionary Guards Corps actually make key military policy decisions, not Iran’s president, but mere political reality is unlikely to slow down the Obama administration and its European Union (“EU”) counterparts.

Before even more irrational exuberance breaks out over Rowhani’s pledge to make Iranian’s nuclear program more “transparent,” however, some history is in order. 

The catnip effect on Western diplomats of negotiating with Iran has never lost its allure. This is something which Hassan Rouhani understands as well or better than anyone.

Rowhani’s long, uninterrupted devotion to Iran’s Islamic Revolution includes heading its National Security Council for sixteen years, and he was Tehran’s key nuclear negotiator in 2003-2005. 

His actions during that period reveal much about him and the regime.

In September, 2003, Britain, France and Germany (“the EU-3”) made several overtures to open talks with Iran, including offering Iran nuclear-reactor technology on the precondition that it cease uranium-enrichment activities, which the EU-3 believed would effectively halt the nuclear-weapons program. 

This proved to be a disastrous mistake. 

Iran was to use the next three-and-one-half years to make steady progress, overcoming the scientific and technological difficulties of uranium conversion, uranium enrichment, and other key elements in its nuclear-weapons effort. 

Rowhani was central to Iran’s strategy of using protracted negotiations to buy time and legitimacy under diplomatic cover.

Senior European diplomats first met with Rowhani on the nuclear issue in October. He said unequivocally that Iran was cooperating with International Atomic Energy Agency (“IAEA”) attempts to monitor Iran’s nuclear activities, which even the gullible EU-3 knew was untrue. 

Rowhani also promised Iran would sign an “Additional Protocol” to its existing IAEA Safeguards Agreement (thereby allowing enhanced IAEA inspections), which it did in December, 2003. 

But as recently as May 22, 2013, the IAEA Secretariat reported that, ten years later, Iran still has not brought the Protocol into force or begun implementing it. 

Rowhani was engaging in the regime’s propensity for empty propaganda, pure and simple.

On the EU’s supposed precondition that Iran cease all enrichment-related activities, Rowhani seized on the chimera that would mesmerize the EU-3 for the next ten years, to this very day. 

He said Iran might consider “suspending” enrichment activities, but only if the West guaranteed a fuel supply for Iran’s nuclear reactors. 

This “promise” was easy for Iran to make, since the mullahs knew we could not effectively verify where all their uranium-enrichment facilities were, let alone judge whether Iran was upholding its side of the bargain.

But as long as negotiations persisted, Iran could build out its nuclear infrastructure while the West blithely ignored the growing danger embodied in these expanding capabilities. And because Iran then had only one operating research reactor, its need for reactor fuel was (and still is) insignificant compared to the enrichment facilities under construction. The only logical explanation for the massive enrichment program was providing weapons-grade uranium for an extensive arsenal of warheads.

When the EU-3 foreign ministers confirmed later in 2003 Iran’s agreement to “suspend” uranium enrichment, they were overjoyed. 

At a joint press conference announcing the “deal.” however, Rowhani explained Iran’s understanding: “We voluntarily chose to do it, which means it could last for one day or one year. It depends on us. As long as Iran thinks that the suspension is beneficial for us it will continue, and whenever we don’t want it, it will end.”

Too bad the EU-3 wasn’t listening. Tehran’s “suspension” was never anything close to the EU-3 precondition of “cessation.” 

Iran continued the key elements of its weapons program, including assembling centrifuges, even though not actually spinning uranium gas in them (at least not that we knew of). 

Numerous EU-3 efforts over many months to tie Iran down failed, with Rowhani needling them at every turn. At one point, in March, 2004, Rowhani said publicly that “We told [the EU-3] that if you don’t fulfill your promise, everything will return to day one,” which is pretty much what happened. 

The “suspension” over which so much diplomatic effort was expended was essentially always an Iranian ruse. As we learned later, Iran was having difficulties with uranium conversion, the process by which uranium is changed chemically from a solid (U3O8) to a gas (UF6), which is then fed into centrifuge cascades for enrichment. 

Not much enrichment was possible without adequate feedstock, so the “suspension” of enrichment activities, which the EU-3 repeatedly but unsuccessfully, tried to make permanent, didn’t actually impair Iran’s program. 

Iran’s repeated statements about the “voluntarily suspension” of some (but not all) enrichment-related activities meant its program was proceeding based on Iran’s technical capabilities and problems, not according to the “agreement” with the EU-3.

But the catnip effect on Western diplomats of negotiating with Iran never lost its allure, which Rowhani understood as well or better than anyone. In March, 2006, the New York Times reported on a speech Rowhani made after stepping down as Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator. Said the Times:

“…in a remarkable admission, Mr. Rowhani suggested in his speech that Iran had used the negotiations with the Europeans to dupe them….. ‘While we were talking with the Europeans in Tehran, we were installing equipment in parts of the facility in Isfahan [the uranium conversion plant], but we still had a long way to go to complete the project,’ he said. ‘In fact, by creating a calm environment, we were able to complete the work on Isfahan.’ As a result of the negotiations with Europe, he added, “we are in fact much more prepared to go to the U.N. Security Council.’”

Rowhani deceived, mocked and disdained the West during his time as Iran’s top nuclear negotiator, while the Iranian nuclear-weapons program continued to progress. There is every reason to believe he will do exactly the same once inaugurated as Iran’s president.





headline: Hiding behind judicial robes in the battle over national security
byline: By John Yoo


In the most unlikely of outcomes, everyone’s favorite crutch in the controversy over the National Security Agency’s eavesdropping programs has become the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC).

Sitting in a steel vault at the top of the Justice Department building in Washington, D.C., the Court issues warrants under the 1978 FISA law, enhanced by the 2001 Patriot Act, to conduct electronic surveillance of potential spies and terrorists.

Using judicial robes to defend valid national security measures should have both libertarians and conservatives worried.

The Constitution clearly resists the effort to legalize national security.

With the revelations that the NSA has collected almost all calling records in the United States and foreign emails, our national leaders have sought cover behind the court’s inches-thick steel doors.

NSA director General Keith Alexander, and the chairs of the Senate and House Intelligence Committees, Senator Dianne Feinstein and Representative Mike Rogers, have all invoked the FISC’s blessings of the NSA’s surveillance programs.

After hanging his military intelligence agencies out to dry for the better part of a month, President Barack Obama finally followed Congress’s lead.

Defending the NSA programs this week, Mr. Obama argued that the process to authorize eavesdropping “is transparent.”

He claimed that “that's why we set up the FISA court.”

Distancing himself from “you know, Dick Cheney,” the president declared that “on this telephone program, you've got a federal court with independent federal judges overseeing the entire program.” And, trying to spread the blame even further, he also told the TV interviewer that “you’ve got Congress overseeing the program.”

Libertarians concerned about Americans’ Fourth Amendment rights should not feel at ease.But it is not the court’s secrecy or lack of defense counsel – a sensible recognition of the need to protect the intelligence sources and methods – that raises the core constitutional problem. Rather, it is that the judges cannot grant true Fourth Amendment warrants under the Patriot Act.

This becomes clear upon examining the text of the Fourth Amendment: “The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.”

Under the Patriot Act and FISA, the FISC does not issue warrants based upon probable cause that a target has committed a crime, which is the normal Fourth Amendment standard.

Instead, the judges issue a warrant based on probable cause that a target is the “agent of a foreign power,” which includes terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda.

Even though FISA may mimic the constitutional language, its authorizations cannot qualify as Fourth Amendment “warrants.” This becomes clear in light of the FISC’s reported approval of the collection of phone call records and foreign emails.

Neither of these programs single out a specific target who has likely committed a crime; they exist precisely to find terrorists who have concealed their activities as normal civilian conduct and have yet to violate the law.

But notice that the Fourth Amendment prohibits only “unreasonable” searches, on the one hand, and requires that “warrants” issue only upon a showing of “probable cause,” on the other.

As the Supreme Court has repeatedly recognized, searches can still meet constitutional standards if they are reasonable, even if they lack a warrant.

This seems nowhere more important than trying to stop terrorist attacks, which, in the words of Judge Richard Posner, can approach looking for a needle in a haystack.

FISA warrants, no matter how carefully considered, represent at best judicial agreement with the executive branch and Congress that these programs are broadly reasonable.

And this is where conservatives should be concerned.

Until the 1978 FISA, presidents unilaterally ordered electronic surveillance of enemy spies and, later, terrorists, based on their Commander-in-Chief powers.

Gathering signals intelligence – i.e., intercepting enemy communications – has long been a weapon in the executive national security arsenal. But stung by the Nixon administration’s abuses of the CIA and NSA to pursue its domestic political opponents, the post-Watergate Congress attempted to tame the commander-in-chief with the rule of judges.

The Constitution clearly resists the effort to legalize national security. Judges are very good at reconstructing historical events (such as crimes), hearing evidence from all relevant parties in formal proceedings, and finding fair results – because they have the luxury of time and resources.

National security and war, however, demand fast decisions based on limited time and imperfect information, where judgments may involve guesses and prediction as much as historical fact.

As the Framers well understood, only a single executive could act with the “decision, activity, secrecy, and dispatch” required for the “administration of war” (in the words of Alexander Hamilton’s Federalist No. 70).

The September 11 attacks made clear the harms of altering the Constitution’s original design for war.

Concerned that domestic law enforcement might use information gathered under the FISA’s lower warrant standards, the FISC erected the much-maligned “wall” that prohibited intelligence agencies from sharing information with the FBI.

That wall prevented the CIA from informing the FBI of the identities of two of the 9-11 hijackers who had entered the country.

A president acting under his commander-in-chief powers, without the unconstitutional involvement of federal judges, could have ordered the agencies to cooperate to track terrorists whose operations don’t stop at national borders.

Hiding behind the FISA court may allow our elected leadership to dilute their accountability for the electronic surveillance that has helped stopped terrorist attacks.It may even reassure the public that a pair of impartial judicial eyes has examined the NSA’s operations and found them reasonable.

But it will also advance the legalization of warfare, which will have the deeper cost of slowing the ability of our military and intelligence agencies to act with the speed and secrecy needed to protect the nation’s security. And judicial involvement won’t magically subject our intelligence operations to the Constitution.

If anything, it will further distort our founding document’s original design to fight and win wars.





headline: Why Jesus and comic books need each other
byline: By Art Ayris


This summer producers of the blockbuster movie "Man of Steel" used some of their marketing might to convince pastors that the image of Superman-as-Christ makes good sermon fodder.

Why?

Because the explosion of successful faith-based films and the record-setting performance of "The Bible" mini-series has proven the importance of the Christian market.

But Christians know that the archetype for all superheroes is Jesus! The Bible is full of heroes and hero tales. They’ve conquered film and TV, but an important battleground remains—comics and graphic novels. (Hey, where do you think they found Superman?)

It might seem odd at first—Christians and comics—because this publishing niche is often associated with the sexualized gore and graphic violence many religious leaders (and others) warn against.

The fact is comics and graphic novels reach a prized demographic extremely difficult to crack with traditional Christian messages—teenage boys and young men. And just as Christians have successfully moved into books, movies and TV, they are similarly moving into comics and graphic novels.

Comics and graphic novels reach a prized demographic extremely difficult to crack with traditional Christian messages—teenage boys and young men.

I should know. A pastor by day, I founded Kingstone Media Group and its dominant imprint Kingstone Comics. Our specific aim -- from day one -- was to attract top names in the comic industry to produce premium quality comics and graphic novels that bring fantastic biblical action and adventure stories to life on their pages in direct competition with the bigger players in this niche.

Our initial goal was that Kingstone would become the ‘Marvel Comics’ of the faith market, but eventually to be considered a legitimate player in the general comics market.

But this isn’t about me or Kingstone. It’s about a large market virtually untapped by Christians. U.S. sales of comics and graphic novels top $750 million, and that is growing. In Japan—with about a third our population—it’s a $5 billion industry.

Best-selling author Randy Alcorn has written more than 40 books with over 7 million sold ranging from non-fiction, to film novelizations, to Christian thrillers. He just wrote his first graphic novel and plans another.

Why? He tells it best with a true story of recently giving a copy of the work—called "Eternity"—to two boys. “I gave them "Eternity." I showed them the art, including Christ on the cross, and his resurrection. I told them the artist has done a lot of work with Marvel Comics. Their eyes were big, and they were delighted to receive it. I've given away a ton of books to countless people over the years, but I've never had one before that unbelieving young people get so animated about.”

The publishing industry knows the explosive young adult niche mainly attracts female readers. Boys read mid-grade fiction, one publishing insider told me, then skip to adult-level books. Graphic novels are the exception, and comics and graphic novels with a different kind of superhero offer an alternative message.

Don’t misunderstand. This is ministry and business. It’s faith-based entrepreneuring. I have investors. They expect a return. I have a market. It won’t tolerate less than top quality. -- God has a message. It deserves editorial and artistic excellence that will compete in the marketplace right alongside Superman, the Wolverine and "The Walking Dead."

And I must compete on the same distribution channels. I’m thrilled that comiXology, the leading digital comics marketplace, recently added Kingstone Comics to their premiere lineup. At the same time, I know that this is the Big Leagues, and our works must earn their place at the plate daily. (ComiXology was the No. 3 top grossing iPad app last year.)

The bar is set high, and the opportunity—business and ministry—is huge. But the formula is simple: Story and quality sell.

The success of "Man of Steel" showed something else this summer. Deep down, people desire a strong, selfless person—perhaps an otherworldly being—to speak something bright and do something good in the world today. In other words, we need heroes, and we need their stories told in ways that people will listen.

If that isn’t an opportunity for Christians—for business and for ministry—I don’t know what is.





headline: Forget the NSA, there are thousands of other ways our government assaults us
byline: By John Stossel


As Americans obsess over NSA spying, abuse by the IRS and other assaults on our freedom, I can’t get my mind off the thousand other ways politicians abuse us.

In their arrogance, they assume that only they solve social problems.

They will solve them by banning this and that, subsidizing groups they deem worthy and setting up massive bureaucracies with a mandate to cure, treat and rescue wayward souls.

Their programs fail, and so they pass new laws to address the failures. It’s one reason that 22 million people now work for government.

Some of the things government does seem like bigger assaults on our freedom than NSA spying, although we’ve become accustomed to the older abuses.

Some of the things they do seem like bigger assaults on our freedom than NSA spying, although we’ve become accustomed to the older abuses.

Take the drug war.

It’s true that some Americans destroy their lives and their families’ lives by using drugs. Others struggle with addiction. But if illegal drugs are as horrible and addictive as we’ve been told, how come the government’s own statistics say millions try those drugs but only a small percentage continue using?

Ninety-five percent of those who have tried what we think of as “hard drugs” report not using the substances in the past month.

Columbia University psychology professor Dr. Carl Hart, author of “High Price: A Neuroscientist’s Journey of Self-Discovery,” says “hard” drugs are not as dangerous as the media make them out to be. For 15 years, he’s studied the effects of marijuana, methamphetamine, crack cocaine and more on users.

“The data simply shows that the vast majority of people who use these drugs don’t go on to become addicted,” he said on my show. “In fact, some of these people go on to become president.”

He means Presidents Clinton, Bush and Obama. “All those guys used illegal drugs at some point.”

Society has grown more accepting of marijuana, but many people believe crack and meth are far more dangerous and addictive, and that they quickly lead to violent criminal behavior.

“The same thing was said about marijuana in the 1930s,” Hart cautions. “People said you use this drug, you go on to commit murder, you go on to use heroin.” New drugs always frighten the authorities.

When the panic over meth passes, we may look back on it with amusement, much the way people now look back on the anti-marijuana propaganda film “Reefer Madness.”

“That was allowed to happen because few people actually used marijuana,” says Hart. The unknown is scarier than the familiar -- like beer.

To learn what drugs really do, Hart advertises for drug users on Craigslist, and then, with government approval, he gives users drugs at his lab at Columbia. He’s discovered that drug users’ brains react in similar ways to the brains of alcohol consumers.

“The vast majority of people who use drugs like cocaine use it on weekends, monthly or every six months,” says Hart. “Most hold jobs. Pay taxes. They do those things, in a similar way that we use drugs like alcohol.”

Government’s anti-drug crusaders think they protect kids by hyping the threat, but Hart says they actually make it harder for people like him to educate the public about real dangers. After the hype over marijuana, young people no longer trust warnings about other drugs.

Finally, he adds, politicians’ futile war kills more people than the forbidden substances themselves.

The gangs of today, like the Crips and the Bloods, are motivated by the absurd profits created when legitimate businesses aren’t allowed to sell something -- just as Al Capone's empire and the violence of his turf wars were created by forbidding mainstream businesses to sell alcohol.
In fact, Hart says, the drug war is worse than Prohibition. It costs more, has lasted longer and doesn’t just kill people in the U.S.: From Afghanistan to Colombia, American helicopters try to destroy drug crops. Foreigners gain one more reason to hate Yankees.

Arrogant and ignorant politicians do more harm than the social problems themselves.





headline: Why jury selection for the Zimmerman trial is a lot like the NFL draft
byline: By Tamara Holder


Jury selection began this week in the George Zimmerman second-degree murder trial of 17- year old Trayvon Martin. Over the course of three weeks, prosecutors and defense attorneys will whittle their way through hundreds of prospective jurors in a collective effort to choose just six jurors and four alternates.

This is not a “who done it” trial, like that of O.J. Simpson or Casey Anthony. There is no dispute Mr. Zimmerman shot and killed Mr. Martin in a central Florida neighborhood on the night of February 28, 2012.

Rather, this case is about whether Mr. Zimmerman’s actions were legal. His position is that he only acted in self-defense after Mr. Martin physically attacked him.

This defense hinges upon a Florida law that allowed him to stand his ground and meet force with force, including deadly force, if he reasonably believed it was necessary to do so to prevent great bodily harm to himself.

Jury selection is strategy. It is just as important, if not more important, than the facts and arguments that will be presented at the trial

Jury selection is much like an NFL draft. A team’s decision on whether to pick a player revolves around his skill, his personality, and whether he can help the team win. But there are no guarantees. A team may think it scored the best player of the draft, only to learn the player is a bust. (Ryan Leaf is a name that comes to mind.)

The defense and prosecution are also teams. Through the jury selection process, legally referred to as voir dire, attorneys will “strike” potential jurors they believe will not vote in their favor and will attempt to seat a juror they believe is sellable on their position. They cannot be sure of a juror's ultimate decision but they can certainly attempt to make the best picks.

Jury selection is an interview process. The best way to learn about the juror is to ask the person about his feelings on issues that are likely to arise in the case.

The death of Trayvon Martin was greatly publicized. Aside from media attention, it also sparked emotionally charged debates -- from race relations, gun ownership, self-defense, youth culture/fashion, and politics. As a result, jury selection strategy should focus heavily on potential jurors’ feelings and beliefs.

Let’s take a look at some of the prospective jurors:

Juror N-18 is a Puerto Rican male whose native tongue is Spanish. He stated that he heard about the case on the news but does not have Internet nor does he read newspapers. He only reads the Bible. He also stated that he believed Mr. Zimmerman to be guilty but that he could put his opinion aside and listen to the evidence.

On one hand, Juror N-18 may be pro-defense because Mr. Zimmerman is also a male of Hispanic descent and he saw photographs of a “hurt” Mr. Zimmerman. On the other hand, he may be pro-prosecution because he stated that he believes Mr. Zimmerman is guilty and he believes in the Ten Commandments, that “thou shall not kill.”

On Day 1, a woman with seven children and a grandmother were questioned. The women may be pro-prosecution because an unarmed, 17-year old represents one of their children or grandchildren. A man, who stated he listens to National Public Radio, may also be pro-prosecution because his choice in radio news may reveal that he has a more liberal mind.

On Day 2 of jury selection, both a man and a woman expressed fear for their safety following a verdict. Their fears may be related to deeper psychological issues with regard to violent crimes. This is a violent crime case with a defense that involves the defendant’s alleged fear for his life. These prospective jurors may be pro-defense because they can relate to Mr. Zimmerman’s fears.

Jury selection is strategy. It is just as important, if not more important, than the facts and arguments that will be presented at the trial. The wrong “pick” can lead to a losing team but the right “pick” can result in a winning verdict.





headline: A legal immigrant’s story
byline: By Ying Ma


The middle-aged woman representing the American Consulate in Guangzhou, China, said something in English. We could not understand, so we turned to her colleague. He looked Chinese and was supposed to be her translator, but he only spoke our language haltingly. My father tried to help with what little English he knew, which consisted of not much more than “how are you” and “thank you.” My brother and I sat quietly and played our part as the well-behaved children of aspiring immigrants to America. My mother looked on nervously.

We lived in China’s third largest city. Chairman Mao had passed away nearly ten years ago but the stench of his failed totalitarian policies was still everywhere. We lived in an apartment that had no running hot water, no refrigerator, no telephone and no modern toilet facilities.

We applied for immigration to the United States soon after China re-opened its economy to the world in the late 1970s. Now, after about four years of waiting, we had finally gotten to “the front of the line.” But on this day, it was not going to be good enough.

Since we believed that immigrating to America was a privilege, not a right, we did what America asked of us and tried to obtain the impossible.

After a few rounds of back and forth, the Chinese-looking man informed us that we would not be going to America, at least not yet. My mother started crying right on the spot. The middle-aged American woman shifted uncomfortably in her seat.

The Consulate wanted additional proof of my mother’s country of birth—she did not have a birth certificate. Children born in the chaos and poverty of the Third World often did not have the luxury of a birth certificate or the record-keeping habits of holding onto their proof of one.

My mother was born in a dusty and impoverished Indonesian town in the first half of the 20th century. She had disclosed her birthplace when my family first applied for immigration to the United States, and the Consulate accepted the relevant paperwork she provided without raising any objections.

But the Chinese-looking man and his colleague wanted the additional documentation now, and they spoke as if what they sought was easy to obtain. They instructed us to get affidavits from friends and neighbors in Indonesia who could attest to my mother’s place of birth. They were not swayed when we informed them that we knew no one in Indonesia anymore.

My mother left Indonesia for China when she was 10 and escaped one poor country for another. She never returned.

Now that our family wanted to leave China for America, America would not let us, unless we delivered the affidavits its consular officers demanded.

Since we believed that immigrating to America was a privilege, not a right, we did what America asked of us and tried to obtain the impossible.

My mother searched her memory for anyone she could have known who still lived in Indonesia. She sent telegrams to individuals whose names she could barely remember and to addresses she knew were likely no longer valid.

Our family bought expensive gifts for acquaintances who might travel to Indonesia, begging them to help us find our old friends and neighbors.

In the end, we found nothing and no one. After each failed attempt—and many times in between, I saw my mother cry quietly in the living room.

Everyone we knew in China wanted to leave for America, and everyone who could leave had already left.

The backwardness of China’s economy and the lingering cruelty of its policies from decades past were all reasons that fueled our desperation. For my parents, perhaps the biggest reason to leave were their two children, one in elementary school and one in junior high, who barely understood the stakes involved. 

We pursued our fruitless efforts to extract affidavits from Indonesia for months, and seeing that we were getting nowhere, the American Consulate finally relented. We were informed that if my mother could obtain affidavits from her siblings attesting to her birth in Indonesia, then America would consider that to be sufficient proof.

Yet collecting the relevant affidavits from my mother’s siblings turned out not to be trouble-free. Two of her siblings lived in Hong Kong, so we wrote letters beseeching them for their help. They encountered scheduling problems and one had health ailments that kept her from attending to our request. A simple task that could have taken a few weeks dragged on for about nine months.

We waited, wondering if our wait would ever end.

It did end, and after what appeared to be an eternity. When the affidavits were finally signed and delivered to the Consulate,. America in turn granted its formal approval of our immigration application, and we rushed to meet her, excitedly and legally.

This was how my family came to America.

We did not disrespect U.S. borders, even though our dreams for a better life were no less desperate than many of those who are now illegally in this country.

Instead, we waited, filled out every form and followed every rule.

We did not believe that we should show up here illegally, and then once we were here long enough, demand that America grant us legal status or even citizenship-- simply because we were already here and too many others have come here illegally just like us.

We could not have known that we would have a U.S. president who likes to dole out government goodies to win an election, even when one of those goodies include is the precious commodity of the right to live and work in the United States.

We could not have expected that the Republican Party would fold like a cheap deck of cards as soon as they saw the cost of not engaging in the same type of racial pandering and political giveaway.

We certainly did not think that we were entitled to the generosity and kindness of the American people, who simply do not have the stomach to break up families and deport millions of people who had violated U.S. laws.

So, we chose the path that we chose.

In the years since our arrival in America, after we became U.S. citizens, we attempted to bring to America my aunt in China whom we loved dearly. By then, the immigration lines for family reunification had grown much longer, and the wait for my aunt—from application to approval—would last take over ten years.

We waited again, as America had told us to, but this time, it indeed would not be good enough. With just a few years left in the immigration lines, my aunt, an able-bodied woman in her forties, passed away after a short battle with cancer.

Before she fell ill, she had the resources to travel to America and overstay her visa. She did not—and we would not have let her—because it was against America’s immigration laws.

So we waited for the happy day when she would finally joined us here in the United States. That day never came. We ran out of time, and America’s illegal immigration population grew. 

We could have made a different set of choices, but having made the choices that we did, we certainly would not accuse those who believe in enforcing the country’s immigration laws of being anti-immigrant or anti-Hispanic. We can only hope that policymakers in Washington would not view protecting U.S. borders as a quaint notion that is no longer worthy of a robust defense.





headline: A nun's hope for Francis’ papacy
byline: By Sister Margaret Carney


Six days ago the first Jesuit pope Jorge Mario Bergoglio took St. Francis of Assisi as his patron and declared that he would be called Pope Francis. Today, he begins a post-modern papacy under the banner of a medieval mystic and reformer.

Why Francis? What's in this name? Is it symbolic or substantive? These—and similar questions—swirled in the media coverage almost immediately after the announcement of the new pontiff’s choice: Pope Francis. The new pontiff’s intention is clear. The fame of St. Francis’ care for the poor motivated his choice. Many strands make up the fascinating story of Francis. A mysterious embrace of a poor way of life is most prominent, but it is hardly the whole of the tale. 
What was this medieval saint’s rapport with women? How did he interact with women leaders of Umbrian and Roman religious circles who figure prominently in his biography? Will Pope Francis also remember that Francis of Assisi also inspired new expressions of religious life? This is the question uppermost in the minds of the many religious congregations of sisters of the United States.

In the past five years many apostolic (differentiated from monastic or contemplative) congregations have experienced a series of investigations of individual sisterhoods to assess compliance with church discipline. This program was followed by imposed reforms of the Leadership Conference of Women Religious. This has strained relationships between the sisterhoods and the Vatican. Officials of the Leadership Conference have taken great pains to contain the controversy by depriving the fire of the oxygen of public comment. Theirs has been an attitude of “stay calm and carry on.” Catholic laity and clergy were quick to rise up in the sisters’ defense. They point to their leadership of Catholic institutions of health care, social service, and education. Those institutions impact lives in profound and pragmatic ways. Loyalty to the sisters is not pious sentiment restricted to “cradle Catholics.” It is rooted in transformative encounters with the sisters as they do the work of Christ. It is stoked by the sight of lives burning down like candles in the sacrifice of unceasing service to the neighbor. That neighbor may live next door or on the next continent. No matter. Some sister will be near—in Newark or New Guinea-- with a response to almost every human need.

Weaknesses in program and process emerge in complex institutions over time. On-going reform and renewal is a constant organizational theme. Religious congregations are complex. Each religious congregation, however, has built into its Vatican-approved constitutions corrective options. Members elect their own executives in cycles of four to six years. Failures of observance of regulations or theological mis-interpretation can be confronted in assemblies to which all members have access as well as voice and vote. Periodic reviews of a commuity’s spiritual vitality and corporate commitments are common. Do some serious problems emerge and call for formal intervention? Certainly…. and rarely! Thus the recent spate of generalized disciplinary actions have saddened the Catholic sisters. Fellow Catholics have demonstrated a rare sense of urgency in calling for a halt. What will Pope Francis do?

The first Francis was a man of medieval culture and sensibility. He did not automatically see women as equals and did not quickly offer equal status to the women who tried to follow his new Gospel-based movement. He was no proto-feminist. He was, however, profoundly imbued with a sense of the relationship of every living creature to the paternal power that he viewed as coming from God. He saw the maternal resonance of that power in the deep life-springs of all of creation. All things stood in mutual divine interdependence. Every creature was alive to him. The sun was a brother, the moon and stars, his sisters. With time and testing experience, he learned that the women who were intent on sharing his vision of evangelical living were his spiritual and moral equals. He eventually conferred a written promise of mutual respect and advocacy for St. Clare—the first among these early female adherents—and the women who joined in her community. She herself hints that this conversion to fully mutual trust took time. Francis and Clare asked for the “privilege of poverty.” It was a papal permission to prove the traditional forms of economic security (property and patrimony) were no longer suited for the Church’s mission in a new era of commercial and social innovaton. In a world in which the “battle of the sexes” seems to take new forms in each generation, the example of Francis and Clare holds out the promise that men and women can find a path of collaborative enterprise that brings new elan to an ancient faith.

A Christian plan leaves room for the Holy Spirit to breathe forth the surprises of history. Wednesday, March 13, 2013 was a day that will forever be remembered for just such a Spirit-borne surprise. The sisters warmly welcome Pope Francis and they nurture the hope that the surprises are not over.

Sr. Margaret Carney, OSF, STD, is president of St. Bonaventure University and the author of "The First Franciscan Woman: Clare of Assisi and Her Form of Life."



headline: On National Donut Day, eat a donut and strike a blow for liberty
byline: By Sam Kazman


Today, Friday, June 7 is National Donut Day, an event that started in the 1930s as a Salvation Army fundraiser (back when donut was spelled “doughnut”) and that in recent years has become an occasion for donut chain giveaways and new food rollouts. We suggest transforming it into something with moral significance—a day to celebrate freedom.

How? 

By eating not one donut but two—one for yourself, and one for your liberty.

What do donuts have to do with liberty, you might ask? Plenty.

Government today has crept into most areas of our lives and is rampaging into the rest. It’s no longer just the Nanny State; it’s Niagara, overwhelming and seemingly unstoppable. 

We have the White House nagging us to eat this and not eat that; FDA slapping warning labels on everything in sight; EPA declaring that every breath we take poisons the climate; and the Department of Energy pushing incandescent lights bulbs into contraband status. 

We have the so-called obesity epidemic being used to justify one new agency initiative after another: “walkable cities”, “strollable suburbs”, mandatory calorie counts on restaurant menus, proposed sin taxes on a host of foods that are suddenly sinful. In short, we have the United States of Bloombergistan.

But just as our hands on the ballot box can accomplish wonders, so can our fingers around a donut. Today is the day to turn that delectable entity into a tool for telling politicians and bureaucrats to mind their own business, all the while treating ourselves to something that’s damn tasty.

So you see, this proposal isn’t a marketing ploy instigated by secret donations to us from Big Donut; it’s a way to tell government to bug off. Rather than just get drenched by this torrent of government “don’ts”, let’s stick a “u” back in and turn them into donuts. (A cheap pun, I admit, but we’re not talking foie gras here.) 

And let’s do it today by unashamedly eating them in public, with smiles on our faces and glazed crumbs on our hands. 

As my colleague, Michelle Minton, puts it, “It’s sweet revenge to eat sweets to protest government attempts to stop us from living as we see fit.”

Of course, even though extremism in defense of liberty is no vice, don’t overdo it.

Now my organization, the Competition Enterprise Institute, is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) group duly designated as such by the IRS. Advocating donuts shouldn’t get us in trouble with them, but you never know.





headline: How to build a terrorist
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Terrorism—homicidal violence of the kind that struck Boston on April 15—requires two things: 

1. Clinging to a set of overvalued ideas that may approach the level of a psychotic delusion

2. Being so completely severed from empathy that the suffering of ones' victims is either ignored or celebrated.

Sadly, cultural, religious and political differences will very likely be a source of conflict throughout the world, forever. But when a set of ideas, religious or not, leads a man to blow up innocent men and women and children, that set of ideas is best defined as psychosis. 

No rational adherent to a faith or movement would believe that blowing up people in a road race is likely to bring about any real goal. Any of his hopes are outside our shared reality. They are psychotic.

The fact that more than one person, or even an entire movement of people, may be gripped by a delusion, does nothing to injure the theory. 

It could be argued that Jim Jones, who orchestrated the mass suicide of 909 followers of the People’s Temple and the murder of 200 children in 1978, was delusional, as were the 909 followers. 

Nazism may best be understood not as rational group hatred, but as a delusion at epidemic levels.

The road to terrorism, like all of the recent mass murders we have witnessed, may also run directly through mental illness.   

The road to terrorism, then, like all of the recent mass murders we have witnessed, may also run directly through mental illness. 

In this regard, the most vulnerable people are those who suffer psychological disorders, prior to being exposed to powerful, core delusional ideas (radical, terrorist theology, in the case of the Boston Marathon bombers). 

The depressed man, wandering a dark emotional landscape, so bleak that it can obscure any idea that previously seemed meritorious to him, even making him as though a stranger from his wife or children, is an easier mark. 

Cults prey on those who are psychologically unstable, offering them a fixed and false (delusional) point of view on the world around them and offering them the false freedom of projecting all their suffering on others, rather than seeking to understand it and truly overcome it in themselves.

Understanding extreme religious doctrine that advocates killing innocent non-believers to be a delusional mental illness would explains the second condition necessary for terrorism: being completely severed from one’s empathy.

Delusions can do that because they sever the delusional individual or individuals from their capacity to feel the pain of others. They transmute the "I-Thou relationship" that Martin Buber wrote about into "I-It." 

One could argue—and I do—that when a man is deprived of his empathy by a set of beliefs that casts entire groups as inhuman and worthy of death then that man is mentally ill. 

None of what I am writing about here excuses the behavior of a terrorist or necessarily suggests the way that a terrorist should be dealt with by the military or the judicial system. But, thinking about extremism as a form of mental illness would certainly suggest a new strategy to combat it. 

Would it not be interesting, for example, if aggressively treating depression (especially the kind linked to irritability) in a particular group turned out to significantly impact the likelihood that such a group would spawn extremist violence?





headline: Obama cutback$ a tour de farce
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Vice President Joe Biden’s entourage racked up nearly $1 million in hotel bills in Europe last month, and a new report says a night in Paris added limo costs of $321,000. The Obamas went on three vacations this year, and the first daughters are in the Bahamas.

Meanwhile, the administration still cries poverty to block public tours of the White House. “Due to staffing reductions resulting from sequestration, we regret to inform you that White House Tours will be canceled effective Saturday, March 9, 2013, until further notice,” its website reads. “We very much regret having to take this action.”

Regret? The closure remains what it was from the start — a calculated scheme to inflict pain on the public, including schoolchildren, to pressure Republicans to restore the cuts.

Click for Michael Goodwin’s full column in the New York Post





headline: Margaret Thatcher was a woman of iron -- with a wicked sense of humor
byline: By Paul Wolfowitz


The similarities between Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan are remarkable. Together they made an invaluable team that changed the course of history at a critical period.

Both were strong leaders who were not afraid to swim against the tide of easy popularity and unconcerned when their adherence to principle was dismissed as ‘simplistic’ by people who thought themselves more sophisticated.

Neither came from a privileged background, and both understood the people whom they were leading.

Both were strongly -- some said stubbornly -- principled, but flexible when it made sense to be, most notably in recognizing early in Mikhail Gorbachev a potential partner that they “could do business with,” as the Iron Lady famously put it.

One of Thatcher's finest moments came when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands.

Both led dramatic turnarounds in the economic fortunes of their countries, after inheriting economies that were in near-crisis. And most importantly, together they helped bring about the end of the Cold War, a transformation in international relations that gives them a permanent place in world history.

But Margaret Thatcher was no mere carbon copy of her American counterpart; and it wasn’t only the fact that she was a woman, leading formidably in a male-dominated arena.

She also wasn’t the leader of a superpower. But under her leadership Britain punched far above its weight.

One of her finest moments came when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands. A weaker leader might have dismissed the effort to liberate a seemingly insignificant territory 8,000 miles away as militarily hopeless and politically imprudent.

Acting largely on her own, but fortunately with the strong backing of President Reagan, Mrs. Thatcher reversed Argentina’s act of aggression. As she said to President George H.W. Bush on the occasion of receiving the Presidential Medal of Freedom, “The decision to use force is not easy to take. . . . Like you, Mr. President, I hate violence. And there's only one thing I hate even more -- giving in to violence. . . . The sanction of force must not be left to tyrants who have no moral scruples about its use."

Her action also led to the Argentine people removing their own military dictators, the first of a wave of peaceful democratic transitions in Latin America over the next ten years that quietly transformed the region.

I was fortunate to be able to accompany President George H.W. Bush to NATO’s first post Cold War summit. I remember Prime Minister Thatcher opening that meeting in London on July 5, 1990, saying with irony that was missed by some, “We are at a turning point in Europe's history, a turning point which is as full of promise as was 1919 and 1945.” Her own deep sense of history told her to be cautious about assuming that the end of a great conflict, even one as long and momentous as the Cold War, meant the end of all conflict.

That caution proved prescient less than a month later, on August 2, when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait.

By a fortunate accident, the President and the Prime Minister were both attending a conference in Aspen and they came to an agreement -- as President Bush put it a few days later -- that this aggression “must not stand.”

It is commonly but mistakenly said that it was on this occasion that Mrs. Thatcher cautioned the American President not “to go wobbly.” In fact, that comment was made in the context of a very tactical question of whether to stop and board one of the first oil tankers coming out of Iraq. 

On the larger strategic question of whether Saddam’s aggression had to be reversed and Kuwait liberated, I never saw President Bush’s resolve waver. But it certainly helped him to have such a stalwart person leading our closest ally.

Where Mrs. Thatcher’s influence might have made an historic difference was when it was sorely missing. With her leadership challenged by members of her own party -- partly over her reluctance to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism -- she was forced to resign as Prime Minister on November 28, 1990. As a result, she was no longer involved when the ceasefire suspending hostilities with Iraq was prematurely concluded after the 100-hour ground offensive of Desert Storm. 

On the first anniversary of the invasion she said that Iraq should have been forced to “hand over Saddam Hussein for international trial as a condition of a Gulf War ceasefire. I think it would have been possible to have got that . . . because I think the Iraqis would have had no alternative." A few years later she told an interviewer that the war had been “stopped, rather too soon” and that the long-term lesson was to “complete the task to which you put your hand.” She didn’t think “that it was necessary to go onto Baghdad,” but the failure to thoroughly defeat the dictator and to abandon the Shia and the Kurds had been a mistake. 

Although Thatcher was characteristically gracious, acknowledging that she was commenting on deliberations “to which I was not privy” and that there “may have been some confusion about the information they were getting as “often happens during wartime,” it seems quite clear what her advice would have been had she still been Prime Minister at the time. 

Had President Bush been able to follow that advice -- as some of his comments at the time suggested he had an inclination to do -- history might have been very different and we might have been spared a second and more costly war.

But Prime Minister Thatcher had a lighter side as well, so perhaps this tribute should end on a less solemn note, with an anecdote related by the late Christopher Hitchens.

Shortly after Thatcher had been elected party leader, Hitchens, who had presciently predicted her political rise and rather audaciously described her as “surprisingly sexy,” was introduced to her at a party. As Hitchens describes the occasion in his memoir:

“Almost as soon as we shook hands . . , I felt that she knew my name and had perhaps connected it to the socialist weekly that had recently called her rather sexy. While she struggled adorably with this moment of pretty confusion, I felt obliged to seek controversy and picked a fight with her on a detail of Rhodesia/ Zimbabwe policy. She took me up on it. I was (as it chances) right on the small point of fact, and she was wrong. But she maintained her wrongness with such adamantine strength that I eventually conceded the point and even bowed slightly to emphasize my acknowledgment. ‘No,’ she said. ‘Bow lower!’ Smiling agreeably, I bent forward a bit farther. ‘No, no,’ she trilled. ‘Much lower!’ By this time, a little group of interested bystanders was gathering. I again bent forward, this time much more self-consciously. Stepping around behind me, she unmasked her batteries and smote me on the rear with the parliamentary order-paper that she had been rolling into a cylinder behind her back. I regained the vertical with some awkwardness. As she walked away, she looked back over her shoulder and gave an almost imperceptibly slight roll of the hip while mouthing the words: ‘Naughty boy!’”

A woman of iron indeed -- and with a wicked sense of humor.





headline: Should the IRS just send us a bill?
byline: By Rodney P. Mock


For most of us April 15 marks the last day to perform the ceremonial task of filing one’s individual federal income tax return. For some, this is a moment of joy as the refund arrives. For others, it’s time to make the dreadful payment to the Treasury. But do we really need to a file tax return? Does it have to be this complicated? Can’t we just get a bill (or check) in the mail?

The U.S. employs a system of “self-assessment.” This means you (or your CPA) must assess (i.e., determine) your taxes and report the results to the IRS. If the Service disagrees with your assessment it will audit your return. And after some administrative process, the Service will assess its version of your taxes. In other circumstances, the Service may even “summarily assess” your taxes (i.e., without any administrative process) as in case with mathematical and clerical errors.

This process of self-assessment occurs each year by filing a tax return. The return comes in three flavors depending on the complexity of one’s situation: the form 1040EZ, 1040A and the full-blown 1040. 

Does it have to be this complicated?  Can’t we just get a bill (or check) in the mail?

The U.S. has a long history of self-assessment dating all the way back to the original tax return of 1913 -- after the ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment. The previous income tax was held unconstitutional.

In 1913 most Americans were not subject to any federal income tax because of the substantial exemption amounts provided to single and married filers. It was only the high-income filers that paid any income taxes. In fact, most Americans were not even required to file a return.

During the years leading up to World War II things changed radically. The exemption amounts were reduced and the tax base was broadened. The income tax system evolved into a “mass tax” on most of the population. And unlike the current system -- the majority paid taxes.

The most recently available IRS data (2010) evidences an entirely different story now. Approximately 41% of all tax filers paid no federal income tax (even their withholdings were returned). This accounts for 58 million filers contributing -- zilch -- nada -- to the federal government -- other than Social Security and Medicare.

Both of these extractions, however, represent future obligations of federal government -- all for the filer’s personal benefit. Making matters worse, when you include those not filing returns some studies suggest the “non-payers” exceed fifty percent.

The data further indicates tax filers claiming the standard deduction on their returns were also in the majority. Approximately 66% (or 94 million tax filers) claimed the standard deduction (i.e., rather than “itemizing” their deductions on Schedule A) -- 46 million taxpayers with tax liability and 48 million non-payers.

When a taxpayer claims the standard deduction there is no need to retain detailed records for expenses that would normally be itemized (e.g., charitable contributions, unreimbursed medical expenses, gambling losses, etc.).

Another advantage of the standard deduction is the taxpayer does not need any actual expenses. In other words, the deduction is free for the taking for most taxpayers. It can also be quite substantial and is adjusted annually for inflation. In many circumstances it exceeds a taxpayer’s itemized deductions.

For example, the standard deduction for 2012 is $11,900 for a married couple filing jointly. For most of us, the single largest personal expense on Schedule A involves homeownership (i.e., mortgage interest and real property taxes). State income taxes are also a large deduction on Schedule A. The remaining deductions are generally riddled with restrictive limitations disallowing their utility.

Many homeowners nevertheless claim the standard deduction when their mortgage interest, real property and state income taxes do not exceed it. This is particularly evident in low cost of living areas (i.e., states other than New York, California, etc.).

Conceptually, the wage employee’s federal income tax already is a “flat tax” for those paying when the standard deduction is claimed -- albeit determined with complexity. Once the standard deduction is claimed a taxpayer is generally not free to reduce his or her tax liability with a multitude of expenses like the itemizers and the self-employed (on Schedule C).

Sure there are the “above-the-line” deductions outside of Schedule A (e.g., retirement plan contributions, student loan interest, etc.) but those deductions are basic and generally known to the IRS. In fact, the Service knows just about everything about the wage employee with its elaborate system of information matching.

Why then self-assess?

Contrary to popular belief, the filing of a return also does not allow one to defer payment to the Service. Instead, the U.S. employs a “pay-as-you-go” system whereby taxes are withheld from one’s check throughout the year (the self-employed make estimated payments). For taxpayers that fail to remit sufficient withholdings (or correct estimated payments) the estimated tax penalty generally applies. There is also a dreaded penalty for those claiming too many allowances with their employer.

It's time to acknowledge this monstrosity for what it is -- a U.S. Treasury check (or zero sum game) for the many and an ugly flat tax for the payors claiming the standard deduction.

Let those with the greatest flexibility over their tax liability file a return (i.e., the itemizers and the self-employed) and leave the rest alone.



headline: Atheism is a religion, too
byline: By Johnnie Moore


For a theist there’s nothing quite like watching an atheist get an intellectual walloping from a preacher.There’s just something apocalyptic about it, and it most easily occurs when the atheist tries to chop up religion to irrelevancy without realizing that he is himself awfully religious.

It happened again recently at the Cambridge Union debating society when former Anglican Archbishop Rowan Williams took on the best known name in contemporary atheism, Richard Dawkins.They were debating whether religion has a role in the 21st century.

Dawkins said it didn’t.

Williams said it did.

Everyone needs and everyone has a “God.” That’s why we’re so religious.

In the end, Williams was handed a decidedly strong victory with more than two times as many votes from the audience as the infamous atheist, Dawkins.It was a triumphant day for the faithful and a shameful one for the irreligious.

But actually no one really is irreligious.

This world beats to the rhythm of religion in a thousand ways, and absolutely everyone is religious -- including atheists.

Religion certainly includes an idea of a God under whom man is inherently subservient, but religion also governs the belief system undergirding the way people think about, and live, their lives.

It tells them who their authority is and it informs their values and behavior. It gives them their sense of morality and goodwill, and it guides them in the way they treat themselves and others. Religion does nothing less than construct one’s view of the world.

Atheists are, in fact, some of the most religious people.

First, they have a functioning God under whom they are subservient (normally it’s science or rationality, but mainly themselves), and that idea of God informs the way they live and interpret their lives. It informs their biases and determines their values, and governs any sense of morality or ethics they adhere too, or ignore.

Once that’s all settled all that’s left is the preaching.

And they preach all the time.

This new breed of atheists is obsessed with the idea of God.They write books, deliver speeches, comment-bomb the evangelical blogosphere and generally rant on ad nauseam about the ills of believing in God.

Honestly – comically – some atheists must type the word “God” on the Internet five times more often than most Christians I know and they do it with the fury of a fire-and-brimstone zealot!

Maybe no one invokes the name of “God” more than they, and they are doing so in more and more virulent ways such as the shocking moment when Dr. Dawkins recently told Al-Jazeera television that he believed being raised Catholic was in itself even more psychologically damaging than being abused by a priest!

Instead of just ignoring God, or the idea of God, atheist preachers feel somehow compelled to rid the Earth of him; so they argue endlessly that theists can’t prove God exists without confessing that they can’t prove he doesn’t either.

Occasionally, some of them discover that they do indeed worship a God, but it is an insufficient one.

They worship a God that loses his car keys when they are in his hand, or that misplaces the glasses on his face – a God filled with flaws and inadequacies, and a God (themselves) whose probability of helping them supernaturally is absolutely zero.

Everyone needs and everyone has a “God.” That’s why we’re so religious.

It’s a matter of which religion is yours.

One of the nice things about the Christian God is that he seems to be as concerned about those that do not believe as those who do.

Or as one skeptic-turned-believer has said of the Him, “a young man who wishes to remain a sound Atheist cannot be too careful of his reading. There are traps everywhere – God is, if I may say it, very unscrupulous.”

He knew it well.

For C.S. Lewis, the iconic British scholar, was himself a convert from the religion of the atheism to the religion of Christianity because, as he later said: “atheism turns out to be too simple.”

Oddly enough, atheists often accuse theists of being the simple ones. We are “anti-intellectual,” they say, and in so doing they become exactly what they accuse us of being.

It must be an unfortunate plight to be both anti-intellectual and religious!

God help them.





headline: Absence of flyovers on Opening Day a loss for military and country
byline: By Lucas Tomlinson


Amid the joys and celebrations of Major League Baseball’s Opening Day festivities throughout the United States Monday, there was an absence that went virtually unnoticed by many in the crowds of sold out ballparks.

Tradition says that after the last note of the country’s national anthem, a military flyover of some sort should put the final exclamation point on the last note of “…brave!!!” But this year, thanks to the military’s decision to ground all military ceremonial “flyovers,” millions of Americans were left without a critical opportunity to not only showcase our military might, but perhaps the first opportunity to see the military in action and think of a future of service in it.

My friend, Mike, was supposed to lead two Navy F/A-18 Hornets over Yankee Stadium yesterday.Instead, he was in civilian clothes standing in the outfield of Nationals Park in Washington, D.C for the home opener against the Florida Marlins.I could not help but think of all the children and young adults packed into Yankee Stadium who would miss out on one of America’s signature pregame festivities.

Millions were left without a critical opportunity to witness the military in action, perhaps for the first time, and think of a future service in it.

For generations of military men and women, seeing the military for the first time often comes in the form of flyover before a big sporting event.Many times, network TV carries the event as well.

The exposure to the military is critical in the recruiting process. Kids should be allowed the opportunity to see these jets in order to help fill the void left when guys like Mike move up the military ranks.Pilots as young as 24 fly these multimillion dollar aircraft.It’s not just the future aviators that miss out—it is our entire Armed Forces.

Some may argue that flyovers are not necessary.They are costly flights and do not bring about any tangible value.

Those who hold such views are incorrect.Military flyovers are training flights.The hours spent training in formation flying are critical for pilots to one day use these skills to fly in harm’s way or in a “show of force,” to a potential adversary.Ask any combat veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan, and he or she will never complain about the sight of military aircraft providing cover overhead.Back home, you will not find many sports fans who don’t enjoy the sight as well.

The Washington Nationals made the most of the flyover ban yesterday.They wisely chose recent Medal of Honor recipient former Army Staff Sergeant Clint Romesha to throw out the game’s ceremonial first pitch.James Brown, host of CBS’s “NFL Today” read Staff Sergeant Romesha’s citation for bravery.The crowd exploded in appreciation.

But next time, I want to see Mike and other aviators flying overhead, not standing in the outfield watching the game.The future of our military is at stake.The military needs to do its part to inspire the next generation of heroes.

Opening Day was a missed opportunity that should not be repeated.





headline: A father's power -- why men must talk with their kids about domestic violence
byline: By William L. McComb


Two weeks ago I tuned into the “Sound of Change,” concert in London that was raising money to advance women’s issues in education, health and justice.

I was drawn to the program for many reasons—the star studded line-up and a curiosity to see how such a broad platform—helping women—could be tackled with such a huge net.

I was also drawn to the concert professionally, so to speak.As the CEO of a company that has for years dedicated its philanthropic efforts to helping women, I was curious to see if our work would intersect in any way. While our philanthropic efforts have resulted in helping thousands of women overcome economic challenges, the work I am most proud of centers on bringing an end to domestic violence.

There are so many voices talking about domestic violence, but few as important, influential, or effective as a father to his children.

Although, I am sure the broadcast met a number of its goals and was able to provide support to many worthy organizations that are combating domestic and sexual violence, I was sorry that the often hidden and stigmatized issue of violence against women, arguably the most important issue holding women back globally, was not elevated even more prominently, given the tremendous opportunity for radical visibility that the concert offered.

It got me thinking about other opportunities to socialize the issue further—and I realized Father’s Day was that opportunity.

There are so many voices talking about domestic violence, but few as important, influential, or effective as a father to his children.

Perhaps the greatest gift we can give our children is the ability to have and sustain healthy, mature relationships, built on respect and trust.

I firmly believe that talking about the problem and educating about healthy relationships can reduce the violence and protect our children. And men can have a powerful impact if our children hear directly from us why healthy relationships must be a priority.

And yet, I’ve seen a survey sponsored by the Avon Foundation for Women that shows that these conversations are not happening. Three out of 4 men in this country say they have not talked about domestic violence or sexual assault with their children. Thus, despite the pervasiveness ofdomestic violence and sexual assault,many people feel like they are something they’d rather not discuss—yet alone bring up with their kids.

That is why I am supporting a new effort, called NO MORE (www.nomore.org), to break through the silence surrounding these problems and get men—fathers— talking about the issue.

NO MORE starts with a symbol – a blue circle that I wear as a pin.

Just by wearing it, I open the door to questions. “What does that blue symbol mean?” and “Why are you wearing that?”

The little blue pin even gave me the chance to tell my own three sons that having healthy relationships is as important a goal and value as any that I could hope for them. Violence and abuse, power and control, are never OK -- ever.

Being self aware and reflective about their relationships is essential -- as is helping their friends become self-aware as well.

There was power in that discussion with my boys; especially as I shared personal stories of hard encounters I had as a child in a home that was characterized by an unhealthy relationship between my parents.

I am now wearing this little blue symbol as a way of saying NO MORE beyond my inner circle. We, as a society, need to say NO MORE —we need to lose our tolerance and patience for domestic violence. The little blue pin is my way of spreading that word.

I hope fathers join me in teaching their sons and daughters about healthy relationships part of their missions as fathers.

Bringing an end to domestic violence and sexual assault will start with people like us—everyday people—standing up and saying NO MORE.





headline: It's not a date, it's just rape
byline: By Martin Hinton


Over the last few weeks I have been learning about the disappearance of Lauren Spierer. Two years ago this June 3rd, the Indiana University sophomore vanished after a celebratory evening spent with friends and fellow students. 

No one has heard from her since. Cristina Corbin’s report on her disappearance airs this weekend on the Fox News Channel. But first, I want you to consider something more general than this specific incident. 

One of several ideas considered by investigators is that Lauren may have been slipped some form of “date rape” drug. The term “date rape” implies an acquaintance between the perpetrator of a rape, and the victim. Sometimes, the crime begins with a woman being drugged. A commonly used drug is Rohypnol, which you might know by one of its nicknames -- "Roofies," "Mexican Valium" and "Rope" are just a few. 

Words matter, and associating the rape of a drugged woman with “dating” is wrong.

So what does this so called “date rape” drug do? It is a sedative that might be legally prescribed by a doctor to treat insomnia.

Its impact on the human body can be dramatic. Like similar drugs -- Valium, Librium and Xanax -- Rohypnol's effects include sedation, muscle relaxation, reduction in anxiety, and amnesia. 

It makes a person easy prey and it can prevent her from clearly remembering all or part of an assault. In clichéd language often used with regard to the crime of rape, it turns “he said, she said” into “he said, she can’t remember.”

What part of that sounds like a date?

Mark Twain once wrote “The difference between the almost right word the right word is really a large matter--it's the difference between the lightning bug and the lightning.” It is with that thought in mind that I want you to consider the phrase “date rape.” 

Words matter, and associating the rape of a drugged woman with “dating” is wrong. If a man takes a woman out and slips a drug in her drink in order to make her easy prey, the date ends there and the rape begins. 

If a man puts a “Roofie” in his pocket and goes to a bar looking for a woman to rape, how is the drug different from a knife or gun or a length of rope that might also be used to facilitate the crime?

Rape should have no qualifiers. People don’t ask for it, and secretly slipping a drug into a woman’s drink while no one watches is the same as putting a gun to her back and saying, “don’t say a word, just walk out the door calmly.” 

Why?

Because the purpose and end result are the same. Each scenario creates power (and powerlessness) and results in the same crime.

To paraphrase Mark Twain, the almost-right words aren’t good enough. They are dishonest. The word “date” suggests a willing occasion of companionability, even romance. It has no place aside the word rape.





headline: A conflicted Democrat's take on the GOP autopsy and CPAC
byline: By Sally Kohn


After attending the 40th annual Conservative Political Action Conference, better known as CPAC, I read the Republican National Committee’s “autopsy report” on the state of the party. As a progressive who pretty much wants to see the conservative movement and its objectives roundly defeated, I'm feeling happily optimistic. But as an American, I'm worried. Here's why.

Conservatives lost the presidential 2012 election. Badly. Anyone who tells you otherwise is lying or heavily medicated. And Republicans didn't just lose because President Obama's campaign had better computer servers or “promised free stuff” to voters. No, the reasons for Republican loss — in the face of what arguably should have been an easy victory, if ever — are much deeper.

First, the people who vote for Republicans (especially older white folks) are shrinking as a percentage of the voter pool while the people who vote for Democrats (especially young people, people of color) are increasing their electoral power. For any Republican who understands simple math, this is a major problem.

As a progressive who pretty much wants to see the conservative movement and its objectives roundly defeated, I'm feeling happily optimistic. But as an American, I'm worried.

Second, Republican stances on the major issues of the day are increasingly unpopular. A majority of Americans, including a majority of gun owners, support the basic gun safety laws like universal background checks that the GOP opposes. A majority of Americans, and particularly young people, support the right of same-sex couples to marry. A majority of Americans want to protect Social Security, Medicare and other safety net programs and would, for instance, rather cut defense spending. And overall, voters remain more concerned about Washington creating jobs than curbing the deficit.

“We have a messaging problem and a messenger problem,” says Tony Katz, a conservative radio host attending CPAC. Come again? When vast swaths of the voting public, who are only increasing demographically, disagree with the Republican stance on core issues? “No,” insists Katz. “The thesis is still right.”

Denial, it turns out, is a river running through the Republican Party.

The problem in the 2012 election, says Jim Hoft of The Gateway Pundit blog, was that “Democrats defined Republicans before they could define themselves.” But the essence of the Republican definition? Not the problem, Hoft told me at CPAC.

Does the conservative movement have a demographic problem, I asked Nicole Douglin, a College Republicans leader from Connecticut. No. The current substance of conservatism appeals to communities of color, Douglin argues, it's just that “the media portrayal of conservatives is warped.”

There's an old saying that Democrats don't know how to win while Republicans don't know how to lose. I can vouch for this on the liberal side. I've been to progressive conferences even after significant liberal political victories where attendees have still been slouching around filled with self-criticism and remorse, or a sense of foreboding about what comes next.

Meanwhile, there is a cleavage on this point forming a cavernous gulf within the Republican Party. The extremist Tea Party wing, arguably most to blame from alienating Republicans from moderate voters, don’t seem to have noticed they lost the election at all let alone the reasons why. At CPAC, Tea Party adherents insisted that if there’s any problem, it’s that the Republican Party is not conservative enough. Michelle Bachmann, Alan West and Sarah Palin were greeted like heroes at CPAC. But these characters are increasingly the reason voters are laughing at and running from the Republican Party.

On the other hand, while the GOP itself is aware of major problems — one doesn’t perform an “autopsy” on something alive and thriving — their diagnosis also misses the mark. Explaining the failure to win the presidency in 2012, RNC chair Reince Priebus said, “Our message was weak; our ground game was insufficient; we weren't inclusive; we were behind in both data and digital; our primary and debate process needed improvement.” 

The Republican establishment also seems to be missing the biggest problem, that voters are increasingly rejecting Republican orthodoxy that the party nonetheless continues to push. Witness the House Republican budget, a plan that voters solidly opposed in the 2012 election and in exit poll after exit poll, including rejecting the man who proposed it, Paul Ryan. A party that would double down on such an unpopular agenda isn’t just lacking good data systems but fundamentally tone deaf.

That's not to say there is no such introspection. It’s encouraging to see the RNC autopsy suggest rethinking ideological orthodoxy at least on immigration reform and gay rights, albeit without outlining specifics. 

At the CPAC conference, there was a very heartening panel discussion in a packed room talking about the need for Republicans to embrace the gay community and adopt more pro-gay stances on issues, such as marriage equality, that not only would help the party demographically in elections but arguably square with conservative and libertarian philosophy. And yet the panel was excluded from the official CPAC agenda, and the gay Republican organization GOProud was yet again uninvited to CPAC this year in response to ongoing protests from religious conservative groups. So, literally, any soul searching on fundamental issues of substance and ideology is happening outside the influential conservative wing of the movement.

Which is why I'm feeling conflicted. On the one hand, since I personally believe that the essence of conservative ideas is beneficial mainly to elites and harmful to opportunity and prosperity for everyone else, I'm more than happy to see the Republican Party continue to alienate poor people, women, people of color and gay folks who will stand little to gain from conservatism anyway.

On the other hand, as an American who believes we should have (at least) two robust and representative political parties to hold each other and our democracy accountable, I'm devastated to see one of those parties continually slide toward irrelevance. We don't need a Republican Party that defends rape and attacks aspiring Americans as criminals while shilling for big business. But we do need a Republican Party that advocates for responsible spending and the balancing of private and public interests.

The Democrat in me is jumping for joy that conservative Republicans remain so willfully and painfully in denial about the essential unpopularity of their extremist agenda. But the American in me, a far greater part of my DNA, is just sad — sad for our political system and our nation's future.





headline: A new kind of terror comes to Britain -- and the world
byline: By Tom Rogan


One minute, a London street bustles with cars and shoppers. The next, a young soldier lies beheaded upon the ground. A blood drenched terrorist speaks confidently into the camera: "You people will never be safe." This wasn’t Baghdad; this was London, May 22, 2013.

For a long time now, the UK has faced a serious threat from Sunni Islamist terrorism. There were the July 7, 2005, bombings and the failed attacks that followed just two weeks later.

There was the 2006 conspiracy to blow up transatlantic passenger planes.

There was the 2007 attempt to destroy a popular nightclub and then a busy airport terminal.

In the Woolich attack, we witnessed terror’s unvarnished face -- as a tool of fear in the service of political intimidation.

There was the plot to record the kidnapping and murder of a Muslim British soldier. Just months ago, another terrorist cell was imprisoned after planning up to 10 bombings. These are only a few examples.

But Wednesday’s attack brought a new kind of terrorism to Britain.

Decapitating a young, unarmed man and then parading their weapons of murder in full public view, these terrorists were not agents of assassination. They showed a deliberate disinterest in escape and knew full well that the police would (eventually) arrive and either capture or kill them.

Instead, they strolled around in seeming euphoria; gleeful in their inhumanity and desperate to maximize their publicity.

Because of the nature of this incident, some are struggling to understand the attackers’ intention. But in the end, this was about political propaganda. It was about presenting a traditional message of violent authoritarianism in a newly vigorous way.

These terrorists wanted to use Western society against itself.

They were aware that the passing public would have cell phone cameras at hand. They knew that via Twitter, Facebook and other engines of modern informational power, their action would permeate the Internet and reach unconstrained across global borders.

In short, they banked on the power of 2013 technology to catalyze the impact and the import of their brutality.

That wanted to broadcast power -- that they fear neither death, nor imprisonment, nor moral boundary.

They wanted us to believe that their resolve fundamentally outweighs ours.

They wanted to use our intolerance for suffering as a mechanism for our acquiescence to their demands.

This attack was also about a challenge to British identity.

Verified press reporting suggests that the suspects are long-time British residents (perhaps even citizens). An understanding accentuated by this video, in which one suspect speaks about what he’s done. In the form of his clothing, articulation and demeanor he bears little in common with our traditional understanding of an Islamist terrorist.

This was probably intentional. By undercutting the notion of British identity in such a horrific way, these men have asserted that timeless terrorist message -- "We’re hidden amongst you. Trust no one."

In this attack, we witnessed terror’s unvarnished face -- as a tool of fear in the service of political intimidation.

It’s true, technology can be an ally to terrorism- it allows simple acts to achieve extraordinary attention. Two men armed with knives and a gun, relying upon a public space and video, sought to use one murder to create a truly global political effect.

Yet, in their ultimate intention -- to weaken Britain, these terrorists have already failed. Just as al-Zarqawi misjudged our American resolve in Iraq, so to have these killers misjudged the British people.

They hoped that Lee Rigby’s death would scare Britons into submission and sectarian fracture. But apart from a few beer sodden thugs, the British people have reacted as they always do. With sustaining spirit and a quiet but imbued resolve.

Today, along with two terrorists condemned by all, Britain has also found two heroes. An unarmed woman and a young soldier, who at home and abroad, served his country and the people of Afghanistan with courage, honor and decency. They’ll be immortalized in honored memory.

On Wednesday, we saw the worst of humanity and the best of Great Britain.





headline: Don't let Memorial Day weekend kick off a summer of booze blues
byline: By Dr. Nicholas Kardaras


We all know the countdown: we’ve been working really hard through the long, cold winter and have been counting down the days to the sweet release of the long, hot, lazy days of summer. 

Sure, we still have to go to work, but many of us also get those long, glorious three-day weekends off: Memorial Day, Fourth of July and Labor Day (with, if you’re lucky, some vacation time thrown in in-between).

Sounds great, doesn't it? And what could be wrong with letting off some much-deserved steam during, say, this year's Memorial Day weekend?

what should you look for this Memorial Day weekend that might be a red flag?
One of the biggest signs of a substance problem is an inability to stop.

Unfortunately, for some, that “letting off some steam” is a time of excess—be it with alcohol or another substance and it can lead to certain problematic patterns that can be hard to shake—even after that long lost weekend or seemingly endless summer.

As the Clinical Director of The Dunes, a high-end drug and alcohol treatment center in the heart of the summer-fun Hamptons, I have seen the after-effects of innocent summer partying gone bad.

Weekend excess in and of itself need not be a bad thing; the problem arises when a person who may otherwise be predisposed towards addiction and addictive tendencies lights the perhaps dormant addiction fuse with excessive partying. 

What we then see is that this person then has an exceedingly difficult time stopping their drinking or drugging—even after the party—or the summer—is over.

Addiction affects approximately 8 to 10 % of the population. There are different ethnological theories about some why people are wired for addiction, but the clinical consensus is that it is due to a combination of a “perfect storm” of genetics, environment, temperament and exposure.

For some, the “long weekends” of summer provide the exposure to excessive alcohol-consumption. And if a person also has the other ingredients that predispose them to addiction, we may have the recipe for full-blown alcohol or substance abuse problems.

So what should you look for this Memorial Day weekend that might be a red flag?

One of the biggest signs of a substance problem is an inability to stop. If you’re at a barbeque, are you the one that needs to keep drinking, even after all the beers are done? Do you then go out to a bar to continue drinking? Or are you the one that goes out driving obsessively looking for more alcohol?

Another tell-tale sign: a person who keeps drinking or drugging despite adverse consequences. In other words, has your “summer drinking” caused problems in your personal or professional life in the past? Have you missed work? Gotten into fights with your spouse or companion over it? Have you gotten a DUI while driving to get more beer after a weekend blow-out?

These are all potential red flags.

If you find yourself drinking too much this Memorial Day weekend—or this summer—ask yourself if you’ve perhaps crossed that line from recreational drinking to problem drinking.

If you think you might have, please reach out to your nearest mental health provider to be pointed in the right direction to get help. And please know this important fact: there is meaningful help out there.





headline: A D-Day tale -- my grandfather buried her father
byline: By Nathan Ward


In 1994, the 50th anniversary year of the Allied invasion of Normandy, I was lucky enough to work as a fact-checker and writer for a distinguished history magazine. This often meant removing a second "t" in "Mathew Brady," untangling fatality figures from casualties, or fielding the readers' challenges that landed in a soft, angry pile in my cube. I did my best to defend the magazine's honor, perched uneasily between the writers and know-it-alls.

DeRonda Elliott and I realized that my grandfather had more or less buried the father she couldn't remember in a big trench on "Bloody Omaha."

Occasionally, my fact-checking duties could be at least as interesting as the writing. There was the World War II bombardier who had apologized in person to the mayors of German towns he'd blasted as a young man, and the reader who sent in a bullet Pretty Boy Floyd had fired into his automobile showroom. And there was DeRonda Elliott, who submitted the saddest story any of us in the office had read.

The article was an account of the father she barely knew, Frank Elliott, a corporal with the 741st Tank Battalion training for the Normandy landings, and it was told simply through her parents' madly crisscrossing war letters, leading up to and trailing off after D-Day, 1944. It proved unbearable to read because her father's messages had continued to arrive weeks after the landing in which he had died from a German bomb in the invasion's first hours.

To continue reading Nathan Ward's article in the Wall Street Journal, click here.





headline: Be a mean mom (or dad) -- protect your child from cyberbullying
byline: By Penny Young Nance


If you're the parent of a teen, you have witnessed this scenario at your own kitchen table, I’m sure. Less talking. More texting. Virtual conversations, whether via smart phones or social media, consume our kids’ existence.

Our children’s social lives are no longer played out at home and at school, where adults are present, but now inhabit dark corners of the Internet. As parents, we want to believe these are harmless digital exchanges with their school friends — but what if they’re not?

Over 88 percent of teenagers say they have seen someone be "mean" and "cruel" to another person on a social network site according to the Pew Research Center. The most common form of cyberbullying is wide distribution of intimate information to the public.

Having private text messages forwarded without consent or having an embarrassing picture posted on Facebook without permission can lead to a tidal wave of emotional and verbal abuse. Now anyone and everyone can provoke a cyber attack without fear of consequences, or so it would seem. 

Go on. Be a mean mom or dad, and find out what your kids are doing online or on their phones. It just might save your child’s life.

But the consequences are very real. According to the Cyberbulling Research Center, virtual attacks result in teenage depression, low self-esteem — and worse — suicide. 

Take the beautiful 15-year-old teenage girl from California, Audrie Pott, who police say was raped while unconscious at a party.

Tragically, Audrie hanged herself eight days after her attackers posted humiliating photos of her on social media. Right before committing suicide, Audrie posted on Facebook, “My life is ruined. ... The whole school knows. ... My life is over. ...” Three 16-year-old boys have been arrested and are being prosecuted in a wrongful death suit, which basically aims to prove that the evil actions of these three teenage boys led to the death of Audrie Pott.

In the wake of Audrie’s case, Canadian police have reopened the case of Rehtaeh Parsons, another teen girl who committed suicide after photos of her alleged sexual assault went viral

And, of course, we cannot forget about the brave rape victim in Stuebenville, Ohio, who is currently seeking justice not just against her convicted rapist but also against the high school football players who filmed the attack and bragged about it by spreading the footage throughout the Web.

Hopefully, Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine’s investigation of both kids and adults involved will culminate in other much-deserved convictions.

But here’s my question: If social media is known as a tremendous problem among our teens, then what are adults going to do to protect them?

Twitter has done a good job providing a “Safety Tips for Parents” page that aims to educate parents on parental blocks. Other researchers are working on apps and algorithms to detect and report bullying online. But these efforts cannot go far enough. 

Think about it. Parents are legally responsible for their children until they reach adulthood. 

Therefore, shouldn’t they be expected to know what’s going on with their own kids in cyberspace? While you cannot always read over your kids’ shoulders, you can keep the lines of communication open.

A wise teacher named Erin Kurt asked her students the same questions every year for over 16 years, and from these responses she learned, “The Top 10 Things Kids Want from Parents.” At the top of the list, most kids just want their parents to sit and talk with them privately. When was the last time you sat down face to face with your child and asked them, “What is going on in your life, and are you all right?”

Beyond open discussions, watch for signs of changed behavior. A teenager’s body language, words, changes in eating and sleep habits, and a drastic drop in grades can all be indications that your child is facing bullying. Silence often makes a powerful statement.

If your child is being cyberbullied, get the passwords and usernames of their social media and e-mail accounts.

Block users who are harassing your child. If threats persist, screenshot hateful posts and pictures and reach out to other parents, schools, and eventually law enforcement.

Above all, validate their feelings and respect their struggles, no matter how seemingly harmless. 

Take a moment to remember how hard it is to be a kid, and then multiply that by about a thousand. We have no idea what they are really up against in today’s culture.

These tactics might seem extreme, but it is our duty as moms and dads to protect our children — sometimes even from themselves. 

I tell my 16-year-old daughter all the time that social media is not a right; it’s a privilege. After all, my husband and I pay the cell phone bill and own the laptops. And as parents, we love our children unconditionally, and we want to save them from immense suffering. 

We are the first line of defense, not the school, not the government.

Finally, pray for your kids every day. As much as we love them, God loves them more. I routinely pray for His protection and also, oddly, for me to catch them if they mess up, so we can correct them and set them immediately on the right path.

Go on. Be a mean mom or dad, and find out what your kids are doing online or on their phones. It just might save your child’s life.





headline: How to survive a mass shooting
byline: By John Matthews


No one ever thinks they are going to be involved in a mass shooting but if last week’s senseless killings in Santa Monica demonstrated one glaring commonality it's this: victim after victim said they did not know what to do. Some simply were lucky and survived while five others tragically did not.

Want to survive a mass shooting? Here is what we have learned from those who have experienced one first- hand.

The best survival tactic once you are aware of the incident is to exit the area. Get away as fast as you can and go as far away as you can. 

Some other important lessons learned from past mass shooting survivors include the importance of playing dead.

This latest incident in California lasted 13 minutes and covered dozens of blocks. You never know where the shooter may go next or even when they leave if they will return to continue their rampage. 

If you can’t leave the area without presenting a target or drawing the attention of the shooter, seek cover, any object that will protect you from bullets including concrete barriers, steel building support beams, brick walls or even thick trees. 

No cover available? Find concealment as quickly as possible by finding something to hide behind which will shield you from the shooter’s line of sight such as bushes, interior walls or even hiding in cabinets.

Whether you run from the area, find cover to protect yourself or seek out concealment to hide always present as small of a target as possible. 

- If you are leaving the area crouch down or use a zigzag pattern while running.

- If you are behind cover stay low and don’t expose body parts.

- If you are hiding try to remain as still and quiet as possible until the shooter passes you by or you have an opportunity to flee the area.

Some other important lessons learned from past mass shooting survivors include the importance of playing dead. This method has worked on multiple occasions, been used by a wide range of individuals (some of whom stated that they saw the tactic on television) and others who just thought it seemed like a good idea at the time. 

Other tactics, which seem just as reasonable -- such as pleading for one’s life -- have failed the majority of the time.

Finally, unless there is absolutely no other alternative do not engage the shooter by attempting to fight them.An armed homicidal manic bent on killing, armed with multiple weapons and hundreds of rounds of ammunition always has the advantage over an unarmed and untrained individual. 

If you have no other option then engage the shooter with multiple people simultaneously and while the shooter is preoccupied with other tasks such as loading their weapon or changing their equipment. 

Mass shootings like the attack in Santa Monica are an American tragedy. Hopefully we can all learn lessons from past events which will help us to survive in the future.





headline: Serving as a voice at the UN for my imprisoned husband Saeed Abedini
byline: By Naghmeh Abedini


Editor's note: Naghmeh Abedini, wife of Paster Saeed Abedini who is currently being held prisoner in Iran, is scheduled to address the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva on Tuesday, June 4, 2013 about her husband's plight.

For nearly a year, the Iranian government has tried to silence my husband, Saeed Abedini, through illegal imprisonment, torture, and threats against our family.

My husband, a U.S. citizen and loving father of our two young children, has been held in Iran's brutal Evin Prison because of his faith -- without a voice to fight for his freedom.

I must, therefore, be his voice.

In light of his failing health due to repeated beatings by his captors and their refusal to give him necessary medical care, I cannot sit idly by – time is running out.

Saeed is not guilty of violating any Iranian law; instead, he is being held as a prisoner of conscience.

A pastor by trade, Saeed went to Iran as part of an ongoing project to build an orphanage for children in need and to visit his family. Barely a month into his work, Iran placed Saeed, who is a 33-year-old dual Iranian-American citizen, under house arrest, without charge.

In September, our worst fears were confirmed when I received a phone call in the middle of the night notifying me that members of Iran’s Revolutionary Guard had taken him away to Evin.

On January 27, 2013, after months of physical and psychological torture, an Iranian Revolutionary court convicted my husband of “endangering national security” because he had peacefully gathered with fellow believers in private homes and sentenced him to eight years.

Saeed is not guilty of violating any Iranian law; instead, he is being held as a prisoner of conscience because he had exercised his fundamental human rights and converted from Islam to Christianity.

In Iran, converting to another faith – whether it be Christianity, Judaism, or Hinduism – is viewed as the ultimate threat to the regime. On two separate occasions Iranian authorities have placed him in solitary confinement in an effort to force him to recant his Christian faith.

Today it is my responsibility to be Saeed’s voice as I address the United Nations Human Rights Council on his behalf in Geneva, Switzerland. Over the past week, I, along with representatives of the American Center for Law and Justice (ACLJ), have met with world leaders, including representatives of the U.S. government, to communicate the dire situation that my husband faces on a daily basis.

Every day he is held in prison could lead to his death.

My request is simple: that the international community joins me in crying out against his persecution.

During my time at the United Nations, I have also been fortunate to meet with other members of the Iranian Diasporas - from Muslims to atheists and human rights defenders to victims of Iran’s persecution. Several of those I met reported that prisoners recently released from Evin had praised the unity and love Saeed brought to those inside the prison walls -- a rarity in such a contentious environment.

As Saeed’s wife, it encourages me to know that Saeed has become a symbol of courage to those fighting for human rights in Iran, regardless of their ethnicity or religious creed.

As Saeed wrote in a recent letter from prison, “I heard that the persecution, my arrest and imprisonment has united churches from different denominations, from different cities and countries, that would never come together because of their differences.”

I am hopeful that our work at the United Nations will be a step forward in facilitating Saeed’s release.

I am so thankful to the 600,000 people in the United States and from all across the world who have signed a petition at SaveSaeed.org calling on Iran to release my husband.

I am also thankful to U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and various U.S. Ambassadors for recently recognizing the gravity of my husband’s case.

We must add more voices to the call for Saeed’s release and the respect of human rights in Iran. The time has come for action. The United States and the international community must do all within our power to defend the basic human rights of those in Iran so that we do not compromise our integrity at home.

Please join me in calling for Saeed’s release, not just for my family, but also to spur action to protect human dignity, freedom of expression, and religious tolerance across the globe.





headline: Christ in a Karmic Age
byline: By Erick Erickson


Every religion and philosophy has a version of the Golden Rule.Until Christ showed up on the scene two thousand years ago, the rule was almost always expressed in the negative — do not do to others what you do not want them to do to you.

It is, if you will allow, a very libertarian philosophy.We can do X, Y, or Z because they do not harm our neighbors.It is the embodiment of karma in today’s culture.We think that we should be allowed to do that which we please as long as we do not harm others.We think that if we do bad things to others, bad things will be visited on us. 

When bad things happen to us or someone else and we think the perpetrator has gotten away with it, the average person tends to think that at some point something bad will happen to the perpetrator. “Karma’s a bitch,” the saying goes.

Either God will smite them or fate will intervene.Likewise, many Christians and others of faith think that when we consciously sin, at some point we are going to be punished, rebuked, or otherwise have our comeuppance.This worldly notion of karma that pollutes even the thinking of many a devoted Christian is not very Biblical and it is something preachers should work harder to combat.

Not only did Christ tell us to refrain from acting in a bad way, but he commanded we act in a positive way.He told us to do to others what we would have them do to us.It was not a live and let live philosophy. It was also not a call for the good to be a worldly good — affirming others as they are that they might affirm us. It was a call to do Christ’s good and to love in Christ’s love.In a karmic age, Christ forces us to confront the idea of grace — a grace that means we have forgiveness without a sword of Damocles hanging over us at any moment dropping should we run afoul of karma.

Grace means Christ has chosen us though we are sinners.His act of grace toward us, and not ourselves, negates karma. It means we must show mercy and offer forgiveness even when we wish not to.It means we strive to be better than we are as Christ works in us, irreversibly changing us through the process of sanctification.Grace makes us more aware of our sin because we remember Christ paid for our sins. 

Karma paints an incomplete picture accepted by too many as the complete picture of life.Grace paints the whole and true picture.Those who believe in karma can accept that “the wages of sin is death” (though they often ignore what sin actually is) and even that “God is not mocked:for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” But karma can neither fathom nor accept that Christ is “the way, and the truth, and the life” and that “no one comes to the Father except through” Christ.Karma cannot accept that “it is finished,” a statement not of succumbing to death, but of the execution of a contract between the saved and their Savior.

If we had Christ on the cross without grace, the cost of karma would mean our instant death as all our sins were placed on Christ.Karma can only exist in the absence of Christ on the cross because no amount of good deed could ever offset the negative karma of our sins leading to Christ’s death.But his resurrection and conquering sin and death gives us His grace. It is Christ’s grace that overwhelms the world through a living sacrifice the blood from which washes away all sins.

Christ’s sacrifice and grace make us aware of the conflict in ourselves.As Paul wrote in Romans, “Although I want to do good, evil is right there with me. For in my inner being I delight in God’s law; but I see another law at work in me, waging war against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner of the law of sin at work within me. What a wretched man I am! Who will rescue me from this body that is subject to death? Thanks be to God, who delivers me through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself in my mind am a slave to God’s law, but in my sinful nature a slave to the law of sin.”

Too many in the modern age embrace karma, not Christ. They see no need to be rescued from their body. They do not see themselves a slave to sin because they reject what Christ’s grace would show us to be sin. The scripture they quote most often is “God helps those who help themselves,” which is not scripture, but Aesop.

Karma tells the world to do no harm and that should one do harm, harm will be visited back on them. Karma is of the world and conforms to the world.So as the world drifts further and further from Christ, the acts that accumulate good karma less and less reflect the Ruler of Heaven, and more and more reflect the ruler of this world.Those who do good in the world of karma hoping for good karma back, do things that please the world hoping the world will please them.

Christ says we must love our neighbor.Karma is content to accept our neighbor’s sin. Grace shows we must love Christ above all other passions.Karma says we must embrace passion itself because that which is pleasing to the world visits pleasure on the world.Christ says the world is hostile to the things of God, which means the pleasures of the world, descending to hedonism, are hostile to those in Christ.Hedonism leads to self-indulgence.Christ leads to self-awareness.

The battle between Christ and karma leads us to the point Christians face in the twenty-first century. Gay marriage, tolerance of sins of the flesh as alternate forms of normal, the triteness of the worldly repeating “judge not lest ye be judged” without understanding its meaning or context, conform to a karma that itself conforms to the world.The world forgets that Jesus also said to “go, and from now on sin no more.”

The world now claims we cannot love the sinner without also loving, or at least tolerating, the sin - even what the sinner does not think is a sin, or is in denial of that sin.But totolerate the sins of the flesh and hedonism is to do to others what you should not want them to do to you. The Christian tries to love the sinner, but not the sin — because we want the sinner led away from sin and back to Christ's grace. Yet the world treats Christian grace as an insult unless the grace a Christian shows becomes worldly — tolerant of sin without the necessity of repentance or Christ. This conflict between karma and grace leads more and more Christians into danger, making the gospel they share weak or nonexistent.

Christian grace becomes an insult unless the grace a Christian shows becomes worldly — tolerance for sin without the necessity of repentance or Christ.This conflict between karma and grace leads more and more Christians into danger, making the gospel they share weak or nonexistent.

These Christians begin to think we should just live and let live.They think Christians can leave the world to its sin.They rationalize that the Bible is only relevant to the Christian. They think the sins of the world are of the world and as long they don’t participate, they can give tacit blessing to others participating.They do not realize that the world, hostile to Christ, will not leave the Christian alone.Karma demands Christians accept the world too. As long as there are Christians who hold firm to Christ and the Word, the world and Christ will remain in karmic imbalance.Karma shows no grace and no mercy.

Still, these Christians begin to say things like, “gay marriage does not affect my marriage, therefore why should I care”; “Christ is love therefore we should not stand in the way of love”; and “I am for fidelity. I am for love, whether it's a man and woman, a woman and a woman, a man and a man. I think the ship has sailed … this is the world we are living in and we need to affirm people wherever they are.”

Grace says we should show love, compassion, and understanding to everyone as we are all sinners. But grace also shows us the cross, Christ on the cross, and the dire consequences of affirming people wherever they are.

Karma says we need to affirm people.Grace says we need to affirm Christ.

Grace gives us a reprieve from karmic beat down for sins because all our sins beat down Christ, put him on a cross, and still he rose again.Christians should not succumb to karmic temptation to conform to the world and avoid the fight.We confront this week Christ, battered, bruised and beaten, bleeding and dying on a cross, then overcoming it all for our sake.He refused to conform to the world so that “everyone who lives and believes in [him] shall never die.”

With Christ risen, we should love our neighbors, but we should also be clear that we cannot condone the very things Christ conquered on our behalf. Christ and his grace are greater than the world and its karma.There can be no truce between grace and karma just as there can be no truce between Christ and the world.





headline: Would you buy and eat a horse meat steak?
headline: New South Carolina scandal -- GOP wants to give big labor a big win
byline: By Erick Erickson


It is an amazing testament to how bad the other candidates were that Mark Sanford ran away with the race in South Carolina’s first congressional district.

A deeply flawed man, he was the one guy the primary voters knew wouldn’t go wobbly in Washington. But they, and I, presumed he was over the issues with his ex-wife. Unfortunately, a couple of weeks ago we learned things were not settled.

The NRCC and GOP abandoned Mark Sanford as a result. In a race the GOP could still — even now — win, the GOP decided it would rather lose than win.

Right now, thanks to the NRCC pulling out of the race, the Democrats are outspending Mark Sanford three to one.

Unfortunately for the GOP, losing South Carolina’s Republican first congressional district will give labor unions a massive win.

The unions, which passionately hate Boeing producing the 787 in Charleston, have poured money in to help Elizabeth Colbert Busch. Right now, thanks to the NRCC pulling out of the race, the Democrats are outspending Mark Sanford three to one.

Yesterday, the Sanford campaign discovered Colbert-Bush has gotten a massive pile of money from another ultra-liberal group. But Republicans are doing nothing.

At this time, even with all Sanford’s flaws, it seems ridiculous that the GOP would give labor unions a massive win. The media will herald it as a rejection, even in South Carolina, of Republicans. The unions will herald it as a major win for big labor.

In the process. the first district would get a stooge for Nancy Pelosi and a puppet for labor unions against Boeing.

Mark Sanford can still win. But he’s going to need a lot of help. The chickens at the NRCC ran as quickly as they could. They need to man up and fight like hell.





headline: We need a 'Dennis Rodman rule' for celebrities who travel to rogue nations
byline: By Mike Gonzalez


The quiet dignity of Rosa Maria Paya was unmistakable Tuesday as she asked the international community to pressure Cuba’s government into allowing a plebiscite on democracy and for an investigation into the murder of her father, dissident leader Oswaldo Paya.

Her poise also offered a sharp contrast to the spectacle unfolding in her country with a visit there by celebrity Beyonce and rapper Jay-Z.

“It would be nice if the Cuban government were peaceful and respectful,” she told a crowd at the National Endowment for Democracy in Washington, D.C., “but that's not true because state security of this government calls my family's house to say ‘I'm going to kill you.’ They did it before my father’s death and they still do it.” She was flanked by pro-democracy campaigners from left to right and by Washington Post editorial page editor Fred Hiatt.

Celebrities who disregard the lives of millions, by celebrating those who torment them, deserve our contempt when they return home.

“I’m sorry, but things are not nice right now in my country. The Cuban people are in a real dangerous situation,” she said. The international community must “stop the impunity of the government inside the island.”

Oswaldo Paya, a truly audacious dissident who endured decades of threats and insults against himself and his family, was killed in a car crash last July 22. The driver, Spanish politician Angel Carromero, says the car was rear-ended by a state security vehicle chasing them. The Cuban government denies the charge. Take your pick.

The courage of Cuba’s dissidents as they brave incarceration, beatings and assassination to stand up for what we take for granted in this country is one of the untold stories of our times. What we are seeing on our screens, instead, is the disgraceful free propaganda that Beyonce and her husband Jay-Z are giving to Cuba’s tormentors.

If they knew the racism that is practiced on a daily basis against Cuba’s blacks, especially Afro-Cuban dissidents, the couple would have perhaps thought twice about going to the island nation.

They could, for example, have watched this video released just last week by the Castro regime to see how the leader of The Ladies in White dissident movement, Berta Soler, is depicted as an ape just because she’s black.

Or, before donning a Che Guevara T-shirt, Jay-Z might have contemplated that the great revolutionary once said of blacks, “The n***** is indolent and lazy, and spends his money on frivolities, whereas the European is forward-looking, organized and intelligent.”

We need a Dennis Rodman Rule, named after the exotic erstwhile basketball star who went to Pyongyang to fete the dictator Kim Jong Eun just weeks before the North Korean threatened to blow the world to smithereens in a fit of pique. The rule should be: celebrities who disregard the lives of millions by celebrating those who torment them deserve only our contempt upon their return home.

Our reverence and support should be saved for the Rosa Maria Payas and Berta Solers of this world. The long-suffering dissidents in Cuba -- and elsewhere -- deserve nothing less.





headline: For Iranians, presidential elections are a symbolic game
byline: By Maryam Rostampour, Marziyeh Amirizadeh


Since the Iranian Revolution in 1979, elections in Iran are a symbolic game. Unlike the government advertisements, or propaganda, showing old footage of Iranians at some polling stations that now are typically empty, the people of Iran don’t have any role in electing a candidate to represent them. Whoever the Supreme Leader of Iran, Ayatollah Khamenei, decides to be the president of Iran will only be in power as a delegate who follows the rules of Khamenei.

Throughout Iran, it is our experience that there are only a few minority groups who support the government and go to the polls willingly on Election Day. However, most ordinary Iranian citizens are forced to put their ballots in the box on Election Day or face losing their government benefits.

To vote in the United States, the rules vary, some states do not even require citizens to show any form of identification in order to cast a vote. It has no bearing on whether or not they will continue to be free or receive Medicare or Social Security checks. In Iran, when a citizen goes to the polls to vote, a government representative stamps his or her identification card, noting who voted and who didn’t. Those who don’t have that stamp in the card will become known as “anti-government” for not supporting the government. This “anti-government” label can prevent an Iranian citizen from being accepted to a school, or anything that is related to the government, they may face rejection without the voting stamp. This also has a negative impact on Iranians socially.Even with this labeling, it is unclear how many Iranians will show up to vote on Election Day, because in recent elections they haven’t. For those who did, it was likely because they feared losing their social positions or even their jobs. The 2009 election was different only because many people went to vote and then protest after the election because they didn’t want President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to be president again, they wanted some kind of change and democracy in Iran, which didn’t happen.

During that Iranian presidential election in 2009, we were being held captive in Evin Prison on charges of apostasy, anti-government activity, and blasphemy, for which we were sentenced to execution by hanging, simply because we were evangelizing and sharing Bibles throughout Iran. While in prison, we learned first-hand how many young people got arrested, tortured, raped and even killed in the street or in unmarked detention centers because they attended the election protests after the sham election to re-elect Ahmadinejad. So as this election nears, it reminds us of the blood of many innocent people who paid the high price for their beliefs or for attending protests surrounding the election. Even today, we have many friends who are still in prison and have to stay there, some because of simply being in streets during a Green Movement rally surrounding the election of 2009.

We believe that this election on Friday, and elections in the future of the Islamic Republic of Iran will be a symbolic game as well because until there is a no longer a dictator who rules over Iran we will not have a fair election. The opinions of the Iranian people or the ballots do not matter and most people in Iran do not approve of the Islamic Republic, but they have no power to change this system. Iranians have no hope for the future of this country, or the elections, until this regime is no longer in power. We long for a free, democratic Iran. The people of Iran long to be free from this oppressive regime.

The people do not want Ayatollahs, the people of Iran, and we join them, hoping that one day they will have a righteous government and experience true “azadi” -- freedom. We recently wrote a book of our experience growing up in Iran and how as young women we were threatened by our government to be killed for evangelizing, or sharing, our Christian faith. Since our release, we have vowed to be a voice for the voiceless of Iran, those who are not free to speak for freedom, for fear of death. We hope to tell the watching world how oppressive this regime continues to be and to ask for prayers for the people of Iran, and especially for our brothers and sisters in Christ who remain in prison there, that someday they will experience true freedom.



headline: Why a conservative voted against feeding public school kids seven days a week
byline: By Dr. R.B.A. Di Muccio


If there’s one topic that distinguishes left from right in the American political psyche, it’s the role of government in supporting the standard of living of disadvantaged or vulnerable groups.

If you're a progressive or Democrat, you're bound to be more favorable to expanding government's social welfare role than if you're a conservative or Republican.

This is such a truism that it is nearly tautological.

A big part of what makes people “progressives” is their receptiveness to the expansion of government's role in ensuring social welfare. A big part of what makes people “conservatives” is their resistance to the same.

I reject the idea that the only way to improve the standard of living of the disadvantaged is through the incessant expansion of government-centered programs.

This contrast shapes a great many of our public policy debates today. For while everyone agrees that poor or disadvantaged people ought to be helped, honest people can disagree about the best ways to accomplish this.

Who or what should be the primary agent of the help/change?

For example, should the federal government give more people food stamps; bring more people onto the Medicaid rolls; expand Head Start to more children? Should we more or less perpetually increase both government spending on social programs and government’s range of activity and responsibility with respect to social programs?

These are all profound national questions. But the smallest, most local decisions are forged out of the very same philosophical clashes.

In the Western Pennsylvania school district where I serve as a school board director, we faced a decision recently that brought all of these problems to the fore. A proposal was made that the district should get involved in providing food packages to poor families to make sure the children have enough food for the weekend. There was discussion about starting a program, funded privately but administered by the district, wherein teachers would “discreetly” place the care packages in students' back packs on Fridays.

Now, there is a perfectly understandable reason why the district has an interest in this matter. Foremost among them is the fact that studies seem to suggest (and it stands to reason) that hungry kids do worse in school. In addition, no one wants to have children going hungry in our district.

So, after a short presentation of the plan and a slightly longer discussion, we had to vote on whether to implement the program in our school.

To make a short story even shorter, I voted against it—not because I don't feel for the poor families or accept the notion that it's generally better for the district not to have hungry kids every Monday.

I voted against it because I simply believe that such a program goes too far afield of our core mission and purpose, which is to educate children. I happen to think there are reasonable limits to the things with which the district should directly concern itself, and on which it should expend money or effort.

We are a school district, not a social services department. Therefore I'd like to see the teachers concentrate on teaching and not being part-time social workers, put in a position of having to decide who needs care packages and devising ways of sneaking them into back packs to avoid embarrassing anyone.

Do I care about the hungry children? I do, indeed. That's why I and my family devote considerable time and treasure to church programs and other relevant charities. But I don't believe that providing weekend food care packages is the school district’s responsibility, nor do I believe that schools are best suited to manage the problem in question.

If you disagree, I urge you to consider where the logic leads. Hungry children do worse in school, so the school should do extraordinary things to feed them. OK, but children with bad parents also do worse in school.

Is it the school’s role to instruct families on parenting skills? If it turns out that students with pets do better in school, should the school then dole out dogs and cats?

Suppose studies showed that students in traditional mother-father families or those that attend church regularly do better. Should the teachers directly insert themselves in ensuring parents don’t get divorced or in encouraging church attendance? Should they be sneaking marriage self-help books or bibles into children’s back packs? Oh the humanity!

Voting against the measure doesn’t make me less caring about disadvantaged children. It simply means I don’t believe schools should be agents of the welfare state. It also means I reject the idea that the only way to improve the standard of living of the disadvantaged is through the incessant expansion of government-centered programs. In short, it means I’m a conservative.

By the way, the measure passed overwhelmingly. Nowadays, keeping government limited—even at the most local level—appears to be an uphill battle.





headline: In Turkey, a protest to protect a tree turns into war against a tyrant
byline: By Oytun Yucel


What once was a protest to protect a tree against the machine turned into a war against a tyrant
We have crossed a milestone in Turkey.

A series of events in Istanbul’s Taksim Square this week showed us the Turkish government of Prime Minister Tayyyip Erdogan is working hard to undermine and crush any resistance that will cause it to stumble on its path to ultimate power. This truth can only be ignored by a blissful ignorance.

How did we get here? Yes, it started with trees in a park. But Erdogan felt the need to demolish the park.

These are the last days of a system. It’s either Erdogan’s victory or the power of the people to come out of this with their freedoms intact.

People rushed to the park to protest the demolition of the last green space in the heart of Istanbul that breathed life into the city -- and its ever-growing façade of gray. What many people had previously ignored suddenly became a mass rally, disrupted when police attacked protesters with tear gas and pepper spray.

The reasons that ordinary Turks have turned into gas-masked protestors traces back much farther than these last two weeks. Since the arrival of Erdogan’s ruling party, the AKP, a majority of Turks have worried about how their lives might shift toward a political system more similar to that of Iran than that of the West.

Erdogan has inched Turkey toward exactly such a system over these past 10 years.

He slowly but steadily conquered every part of the system, making sure the gears never turned against their revolution.

The result was a majority for his party in the Turkish parliament, with the power to vote up or down anything, according to Erdogan’s will. The law and police force cleared the way of any bumps they might encounter on the road.

Erdogan instilled fear in the 49 percent of the Turkish population that did not vote for his party. For many, a single word or comment might result in arrest or jail -- as has been the fate of many who tried to voice their concerns and opposition to the government.

With the latest moves by the government to dictate everything from alcohol sales to abortion rights to the number of kids each family should have – while pushing ahead with construction projects without consulting those involved – the camel’s back finally broke.

So the crowds raged on, while Erdogan either dismissed protesters as thieves, ignored them, or accused them of being pawns of foreign terror organizations. Meanwhile, everything deemed illegal for the people suddenly became legal in the hands of the Turkish police.

A new era in the evolution of government tyranny is now on full display.

The Turkish media, which had ignored the protests, is suddenly covering acts of alleged protestor violence and police intervention. Meanwhile, police invaded the Court of Justice to arrest attorneys and prosecutors, an act that is strictly banned by the law.

Yet many people are standing strong. And a few positive effects of the movement can’t go unmentioned.

First, the faith in the Turkish people has been restored in many hearts. Many of us stopped believing any kind of resistance was possible. Most felt abandoning the country was the only solution.

But this movement has sparked the people’s passion, and fused the will to reclaim the freedoms of speech -- and of living.

People were afraid to criticize or poke fun at Erdogan in any way – such acts usually ended up with him suing. So this partial liberation has cleared the mist over a long-forgotten Turkish sense of humor that many have wanted to express for so long.

Today, we not only struggle against Erdogan’s mingling hand, but also are trying to patch the increasing polarization he forces on the country.

What once was a protest to protect a tree against the machine turned into a war against a tyrant that will not stop to exert any measure of vengence against a crowd that’s asking for what’s rightfully theirs, as stated by the rules of democracy.

These are the last days of a system. It’s either Erdogan’s victory, which will lead to theocracy, or the power of the people to come out of this with their freedoms intact.

One thing is for sure: The Turkish people have lost their sense of fear on the path to freedom. They have numbed their senses against the burns by the pepper gas, and don’t mind the taste of the stick on their flesh.
No one will back down until their rights are back where they belong.





headline: Why America's unemployment remains a problem
byline: By Peter Morici


Friday, the Labor Department is expected to report the economy added 153,000 jobs in April—up from 88,000 in March—and unemployment is expected steady at 7.6 percent. This gain may prove short lived, and this pace is well below what is needed to get unemployment to acceptable levels.

New hiring lags behind broader economic growth. In the fourth quarter, GDP was up only 0.4 percent—with businesses continually improving productivity, the economy was lucky to have created any jobs at all this past winter.

Businesses remain cautious about future demand, and reluctant to invest in new machinery, computers and software that would improve worker efficiency.

In the second quarter, GDP growth rebounded to 2.5 percent, but about 40 percent of that growth came from businesses piling up inventory—not from the final sales. Underlying demand remains weak—January tax increases limit household spending, trade deficits on China and oil continue to leak consumer dollars abroad, and sequester spending cuts reduce government purchases.

Generally, economists expect second quarter growth at 2 percent or less—about the same or less than potential improvements in worker productivity; hence, jobs creation should slow through the spring. The unemployment rate would rise but for so many additional folks choosing not to work—663,000 in April.

Should economic growth pick up, many adults may be expected to rejoin the hunt, and the economy would have to add more than 360 thousand jobs each month for 3 years to lower unemployment to 6 percent. That would require growth in the range of 4 to 5 percent—this is possible but not likely with current policies.

Since turning the corner in mid-2009, GDP growth has averaged 2.1 percent and unemployment has fallen from 10.0 percent to 7.6 percent.

In contrast, high oil prices and double digit interest rates pushed unemployment to 10.8 percent during Ronald Reagan’s first term; then GDP growth averaged 5.3 percent for the next three and half years, and unemployment fell to 7.3 percent.

Factors contributing to the slow pace of recovery include the huge trade deficits on oil and manufactured products from China and elsewhere in Asia—these drain demand for U.S. goods and services. Absent U.S. policies to confront Asian governments about their purposefully undervalued currencies, and to develop more oil offshore and in Alaska, the trade deficit will continue to tax growth.

The recent surge in natural gas production, and accompanying lower prices, is substantially improving the international competitiveness of industries like petrochemicals, fertilizers, plastics, and primary metals—as well as consuming industries like industrial machinery and building materials.

However, the Department of Energy is considering proposals to boost exports of liquefied gas, which would create many fewer jobs, than keeping the gas at home.

Dodd-Frank regulations continue to make lending by regional banks to small businesses difficult. Many smaller banks have sold out or are considering consolidation with money center banks, which are less inclined to small business lending.

More onerous regulatory reviews are an increasing complaint among businesses. Government needs to subject policies to protect the environment and other goals to the same efficacy standards the market applies to commercial technologies—regulatory assessments and enforcement are needed but those must be delivered cost effectively and quickly to add value.

Many businesses look to Asia where government policies are more accommodating and prospects for growth remain stronger.

A better jobs market is simply not possible without better trade, energy and regulatory policies.





headline: Does Obama's Israel trip have a prayer?
byline: By Michael Goodwin


Near the end of his insider’s account of the Bush administration’s efforts to broker an Israeli-Palestinian peace, author Elliott Abrams cautions about temptations in Washington to put “daylight” between America and the Jewish state. Whatever the circumstances, he writes, the result is that Israel always feels less secure and is thus less likely “to take risks for peace.”

The passage is part of a riveting chronicle of the last administration, but also serves as a not-so-subtle slap at the current one. With Barack Obama preparing for Tuesday’s trip to Israel and the West Bank, his first as president, Abrams offers a timely warning that Obama won’t achieve anything if he repeats the mistakes of the past, including his own.

The absence of serious peace talks during the last four years is largely a product of his misguided bid to tilt away from Israel and toward the Arabs. It was a policy Obama revealed in Cairo in 2009, pursued throughout his first term and, by making Israel nemesis Chuck Hagel defense secretary, continues in his second.

To continue reading Michael Goodwin's New York Post column on Obama trip to Israel, click here.





headline: ObamaCare forces a good doctor to quit
byline: By Cal Thomas


Last week, politicians who helped craft the Affordable Care Act (ACA) celebrated in self-congratulatory style the third anniversary of that monstrosity which will soon extinguish health care as we've known it.

The president's promises about the ACA saving money and allowing you to keep your existing health plan are proving false, as many predicted.

The Department of Health and Human Services maintains the law will make health care more affordable and accessible. The Wall Street Journal, reminding readers of that claim, reported last week that health insurers are privately warning brokers: "premiums for many individuals and small businesses could increase sharply next year."

The 2013 Deloitte Survey of U.S. Physicians, a survey of more than 600 physicians from the Deloitte Center for Health Solutions, found that "Six in 10 physicians (62 percent) said it is likely many of their colleagues will retire earlier than planned in the next one to three years."

Based on the survey results, Deloitte found that most U.S. physicians believe that, among other worries, under Obamacare, "The future of the medical profession may be in jeopardy as it loses clinical autonomy and compensation" and "Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements may be problematic, prompting many physicians to limit or close their practices to these enrollees." Instead of the established doctor-patient relationship of old, "eight in 10 physicians agree "that the wave of the future in medicine ... involves interdisciplinary teams and care coordinators."

One who thinks he's seen the future and doesn't like it, is my physician, Dr. John Curry of Fairfax, Va. At my request, he sent me the following e-mail:

"Forty years ago, when I began practicing primary care medicine, medical decision-making and its funding were in the hands of patients and their physicians. The only protection patients had lay in the professional ethics of their doctors. In modern terms that sounds pretty skimpy, but think about it for a minute. The first precept was 'Do no harm'. Ask yourself: can you hold your government to that standard?

"The underlying principle was that the physician had to put his patients' interests ahead of his own. This was, of course, the Golden Rule, formalized into standards for professional care. It was also the reason I, and many in my class, applied to medical school. It was the reason my wife's older brother, who practiced medicine in a small town in West Texas, prided himself on the fact that much of the time he 'was paid in peas and pies'. Again, ask yourself, is there any health insurance company or government agency that you can count upon to put your health above their interests?

"The decades have rolled by, and the sea-changes have come. Costs have risen, and personalized care has faded. The monstrosity has been birthed, and soon you will look in vain if you are seeking a personal physician who knows you, cares about you, and to whom you have ready access. You will find only systems, ready to suck you up, give you a number, and provide you with federally approved accountable care in a sterile environment populated by highly regulated strangers. And it will cost you a lot! (Whatever anyone says, prepare for a future where your health costs will be higher and your choices fewer!)

"I am in my mid-70s and have both the capacity and willingness to care for patients for another decade. But I am retiring. I cannot stand it anymore. More than half of my time in the office is spent filling out forms, writing letters, responding to inquiries, and attending to 'urgent' matters that did not exist 10 years ago. And every year my income is less. At this point I would rather be paid nothing and have the freedom to decide what is right for my patients. ACA is only another straw, but for this tired camel, it will break my back."

Neither I, nor the country, can afford to lose doctors like John Curry, but we are and we will. Take two aspirin, but don't call in the morning because Dr. Curry and many like him won't be there to answer the phone.





Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: A great country deserves a great immigration system
byline: By Sen. John Cornyn


Immigration reform is, at its core, a human issue. Good policy is driven by good data, but we must never lose sight of the fact that behind every statistic there is a person – a son or a daughter, a mother or a father. 

Last weekend, as I traveled through South Texas, I met some of these people. The stories they shared with me illustrate the humanity of the immigration debate that all sides must acknowledge.

In Rio Grande City, I met a young woman who came to Texas to escape persecution in El Salvador several years ago. She did so illegally, paying thousands of dollars to be smuggled across the border. 

The basic challenge of immigration reform will be to reconcile our compassion as Americans to the fundamental importance of the rule of law, without yielding to either.

After arriving in Texas, she fell victim to the same man she had entrusted to bring her into the country. He beat her, raped her, and forced her into a life of prostitution. For years she endured this terror and misery, until she summoned the courage to reach out for help.

By the tragic standards of illegal immigration, some would say she’s among the lucky ones. Unlike so many others, she survived the grueling trek through South Texas that has needlessly taken the lives of so many.

For ranchers in Brooks County, some 70 miles north of the border, the sight of illegal border-crossers traversing their land is routine. 

In my short time there, I saw many. 

Even so, it is often the migrants you don’t see trudging through the brush that offer the most heart wrenching reminder of the dismal state of our immigration system.

These ranchers told me how terribly common it is to find human remains around their homes. These are the ones who didn’t make it – the ones who fell behind and were left to do die by a smuggler who treated them like expendable chattel. In an effort to save lives, many ranchers leave stashes of water throughout their property, but the corpses continue to accumulate at an alarming rate. 

It falls upon the Brooks County Sheriff’s Department to respectfully retire the unidentified remains. I met with County Judge Raul Ramirez in Falfurrias, where he led me through a section of the local cemetery that has been set aside for this purpose.

Row after row of burial mounds cover three sections of the cemetery. At the head of each mound is a simple aluminum marker bearing a serial number, a date, and a brusque description of what lies beneath: “female skeleton,” “skull,” “bones.”

Unknown and unidentified, they lay far from home and far from the American dream that lured them across the border. 

Each grave tells a story that ends in tragedy, and collectively they tell the story of a broken immigration system and a border that is still porous. The notion that these people died for the chance to live and work amongst us is at once humbling and horrifying. 

As Americans, we have built a great country, but we have not built the immigration system necessary to serve it.

A great country deserves a great immigration system. This means recognizing the incentives that lead to the growing number of nameless burial mounds. It means understanding the malevolent forces that transact in human flesh. And it means giving federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies the resources they need to save lives and uphold our laws. 

The basic challenge of immigration reform will be to reconcile our compassion as Americans to the fundamental importance of the rule of law, without yielding to either. As a policymaker, I have a responsibility to find real solutions to these issues that are all-too-familiar to Texans. Anything less only perpetuates this grotesque human tragedy playing out every day on American soil.





headline: Dzhokhar Tsarnaev is a killer and should be punished as a killer
byline: By Cal Thomas


One of the consequences of abandoning a standard by which right and wrong can be judged is our increasing inability to mete out punishment that fits the crime. In fact, too often we weigh extenuating circumstances rather than guilty actions.

In the case of the Boston bombers, observers search for reasons why the attacks occurred. But the failure to view the attackers as anything other than simply guilty and judge them accordingly, is similar to the U.S. government's attitude toward the Middle East, which often sees Israel as the major impediment to peace.

There is little expectation that Israel's enemies be held accountable, much less punished for terrorist acts, hateful rhetoric against Jews and their refusal to reciprocate Israel's peace offerings.

The irrational reasoning goes that we must work to understand why they hate and kill, not hold them accountable for hating and killing. The Tsarnaev brothers are killers. They should be punished as killers.

The Tsarnaev brothers are killers. They should be punished as killers.

The surviving bomber, 19-year-old Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, has been charged with using a "weapon of mass destruction." The U.S. government could have charged him with a lot more.

Why didn't it?

Does not charging Tsarnaev with more lessen the severity of what happened in Boston?

The Obama administration could have and should have included treason among the charges and designated Tsarnaev as an enemy combatant in this "War on Terror" we are supposed to be fighting, or were fighting, until the administration started softening the language under the false belief that not calling acts of terror acts of terror somehow transforms them into something less lethal.

This administration has been reluctant to try terrorists in military courts. Instead, in 2010, it attempted to try 9/11 mastermind Khalid Shaikh Mohammed in the Manhattan federal courthouse, not Guantanamo.

Faced with widespread opposition, the U.S. government quickly abandoned its plans. Tsarnaev, a naturalized U.S. citizen, and therefore entitled to all the rights of citizenship, will be tried in U.S. federal court. He should be tried by military tribunal.

Tsarnaev is a traitor to his adopted country. When he took the oath of citizenship last September 11, of all dates, he swore allegiance to America. Whether he lied about his intentions at the time, or became "radicalized" since then, the acts he and his brother are alleged to have committed are treasonous. He is an enemy combatant.

Refusing to label Tsarnaev's actions for what they are -- traitorous -- does not change the nature of the act, or the intentions behind it. But that's what President Obama seems to be doing elsewhere.

FoxNews.com reported in 2010 that, according to counterterrorism officials, there was a proposal by the Obama administration to remove religious terms such as "Islamic extremism" from the National Security Strategy document, a radical shift in language from previous documents.

That year, the Washington Times reported, the Department of Homeland Security's Quadrennial Homeland Security Review, "...does not use the words "Islam" or "Islamist" a single time.

How will erasing a few words from the National Security Strategy lead to Muslim nations making nice? The president's 2009 "outreach" speech in Cairo did nothing to change the dynamic between many Muslim nations and the West, and there appears little or no evidence that similar efforts have changed anything since.

Here is what the National Security Strategy document that previously outlined the Bush Doctrine of preventative war said: "The struggle against militant Islamic radicalism is the greatest ideological conflict of the early years of the 21st century."

Is this not true? If it is true, how will massaging the language reduce the likelihood of future terrorist acts? How will not fitting the punishment to the crime make us any safer?

Having removed many of the boundaries of right and wrong and forgetting what makes an American an American, we are finding it difficult now to redraw boundaries that will keep us safe at a time when we need it most.

Call terror by its rightful name. Judge Dzhokhar Tsarnaev by the crimes he has committed and let his punishment fit them.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: A conservative's review of the GOP 'autopsy'
byline: By Erick Erickson


The Republican National Committee has released its 100 page autopsy of 2012, with 97 pages of fun filled reading. Reince Preibus, chairman of the RNC, ordered up the autopsy to try to find a way forward for the GOP without repeating many of the mistakes made in Campaign 2012. It’s authors were Henry Barbour, Ari Fleischer, Sally Bradshow, Zori Fonalledas, and Glenn McCall.

What the autopsy misses out of the gate is that some times there is nothing that can be done. Bad election years are bad election years. Candidates like Josh Mandel were model candidates for the GOP who ran great races, but still lost. Some times it just happens.

There are, however, some fundamental problems with the Republican Party and the autopsy does make some effort at examining those.

Data and technology are key aspects of failure in the Republican Party. The once heralded “voter vault” program eventually fell into outdated information and became an expense.

The Growth and Opportunity Project is not a policy committee. It just plays one on page eight and following in its report.

The Republican Party must again collect and wisely use data, cross referencing consumer data with voter data to find and persuade undecided voters to get out to vote.

One area the autopsy fails to really touch on that relates to data and technology is the consultant class. To be sure, there is language in the autopsy about teaching campaign managers to better corral and manage consultants, but the consultant class within the Republican Party remains far more incestuous than the Democratic Party. Likewise, it is far more interested in dollar generation than voter generation. The autopsy dances around this with language about expanding the pool of consultants used, but does not go far enough.

The presidential primaries get a lot of attention from the autopsy authors. They advocate getting rid of caucuses and conventions to select the nominee. The grassroots tend to bristle at these ideas, but many Republican voters are tired of the unrepresentative charade that is Iowa first, then New Hampshire, then everybody else. Regional primaries make sense.

The problem, and there is always a problem, is that for the last several years the Republican National Committee was heavily stacked with people sympathetic to Mitt Romney. Likewise, a shortened primary system without caucuses benefits the guy with the most money. Caucuses also serve a good purpose in testing actual strength with the grassroots who must be mobilized for the general election. There is too much distrust to be able to change the system so much so quickly.

Debates are another subject of the autopsy. Many Republicans wondered why the GOP would ever allow NBC to host a debate, let alone with the Politico, given the biases involved.

Additionally, there were too many debates. The debates were exhausting for viewers, let alone the candidates. They turned into instruments of gaffe that could later be used against the candidates.

Limiting them and letting the Republican National Committee assist in selecting moderators would be advantageous to a campaign system that, because of its mechanics, stretches the campaign season out too far.

For many campaigns, the problems with the autopsy will come from the mechanics. Smaller campaigns do not want all primaries because those benefit the monied interests. Outsiders distrust the insiders and want to limit control of the RNC. There is a great deal of distrust and, given the background of the authors, many will read into the report that it is aimed to help certain interest groups, whether that is right or not.

Ari Fleischer worked for George W. Bush. Sally Bradshaw is a confidante of Jeb Bush. Henry Barbour is related to Haley Barbour who is tied to American Crossroads, which is connected to Karl Rove, who with Crossroads is setting up a Super PAC many believe is designed to shut out conservative candidates. Zori Fonalledas is an RNC Committeewoman from Puerto Rico. Glenn McCall is a long time Republican from South Carolina.

People will read what they want into the connections and backgrounds of the authors, even though it seems clear they really tried to be as objective as possible. Therein lies the problem for the Republican grassroots.

The group was specifically designed to not be a policy committee and, in fact, hid behind that to make policy recommendations. For example, on page eight of the report, they write, “We are not a policy committee, but among the steps Republicans take in the Hispanic community and beyond, we must embrace and champion comprehensive immigration reform.” Get it? They are not a policy committee, but here is a policy that must be supported.

They also note that younger voters view support for gay marriage as a litmus test. There was lots of talk about inclusivity.

The problem with the non-policy committee discussing policies that must be supported is that much of what they say is not new. Ask any inside the Beltway establishment Republican and they would say the same thing. Instead of advocating pivoting on the issues or changing the focus of issues, the autopsy authors chose to engage on divided ground, take a side, but then proclaim themselves not a policy committee.

Perhaps it would have been better to recognize the GOP should shift the conversation on immigration to the needs for a low skilled worker immigration program that unions would find offensive, but would resonate with much of the Republican base and the Hispanic community.

On gay marriage, it would have been equally constructive to move the conversation to carving out exceptions for the religious who object to gay marriage and do not want to be forced, because of religious conviction, to engage in gay marriages. There are already stories about bakers being harassed for not wanting make wedding cakes for gay marriages and churches being harassed for not wanting to allow gay marriages in their churches.

But the Growth and Opportunity Project is not a policy committee. It just plays one on page eight and following in its report. That there is so much beltway thinking at the start of the report, as well as attacks on outside groups like the Club for Growth for daring to make primary challenges, suggests the report is steeped in conventional wisdom and existing establishment thinking without seriously considering that wisdom and thinking could be misguided or simply wrong.

There are areas of common agreement. The authors were brave to even have their names on the report given that they are bound to make many people angry.

Two things work to their disadvantage. The first is trying to have it both ways on policies that are deeply divisive within the Republican Party. The second, not of their own making, is the report’s focus on data and data driven metrics coming out at the same time Karl Rove is announcing a “digital platform for targeting voters and donors.”

Given the language of the report and a deep, pre-existing distrust by many conservative of Karl Rove and this autopsy effort, the timing of the Rove announcement and the autopsy’s release will be met very skeptically by many who would otherwise agree with much of the report.

Perceptions matter and right now the perception is that the Republican National Committee remains indebted to many the base of the party blames for its stagnation.

The report’s release and its content offer little to help that.





headline: Abortion and fatherhood -- a man's take
byline: By Brian Fisher, Brian Fisher


A dear friend of mine recently confessed to me that he was the father of one living daughter and four deceased children. The four were aborted, three with his consent and one without. My friend said the pain of those deaths is something he copes with on a daily basis. “The guilt and pain can be overwhelming,” he said.

Another friend still can’t hold back tears, even after 20 years, when he shares that he took his then-girlfriend to Planned Parenthood to erase the “mistake” they made a few months before their wedding. Now married for two decades and the parent of four other beautiful children, he recounts how his marriage was difficult and tumultuous for years until they sought counseling. The root of their conflict and strife? The abortion.

As we approach Father’s Day once again, more and more men are realizing the impact abortion has not only had on women, but also on themselves. And the impact is anything but positive.

Abortion didn’t empower women.  It empowered men. 

What’s going on here? Abortion is a women’s issue and has nothing to do with men, right? Why are men struggling with the loss of their aborted children?

Because, despite what the law says, fathers are fathers from conception, not from birth.

The landmark 1973 Supreme Court decision, Roe v. Wade, effectively stripped the father of all legal rights regarding his unborn child.Before that decision, men were fathers from the day their child came into being, at conception.

But, with the stroke of a pen, fatherhood jumped nine months into the future. Mothers, meanwhile, maintained their parental rights from the day of conception. So much for equal rights for men and women.

Of course, millions of men welcomed the change.The sexual revolution was booming, and men were experiencing a new kind of empowerment we hadn’t previously enjoyed.

We could now sleep with anyone we wanted without any fear of responsibility if our female partner became pregnant.

The one thing that had kept us from expressing our rampant sexuality, fear of conception, was now of no concern.

Not only did we no longer have to fear a pregnancy, we had no legal right to make any decision regarding the child in the womb.

If our partner decided to abort, well, that was her call.

If she asked us our opinion about an abortion, all we had to do was utter our all-too-common response, “It’s your decision, babe. I’ll support whatever you decide.” Which, of course, was our way of saying, “I don’t care enough about you or the child to have a real opinion.”

Abortion didn’t empower women. It empowered men.

Fast forward to Father’s Day 2013.

Fifty-five million aborted babies later, it seems many men are realizing the Supreme Court got it wrong. Fatherhood doesn’t start with birth. It starts when we opt to sleep with a woman. And, despite federal law, our consciences testify that we are wired to protect and care for a child when it is conceived, not nine months later.

There are also an estimated 15 million fathers who, for whatever reason, lost children to elective death in the womb. Men have failed their families and their children.

The tide is beginning to turn, however. Men are realizing no one escapes the hell of abortion.

We are waking up and realizing that children are killed and women are exploited.

We are just now considering, though, that we victimize ourselves.

Depression, guilt, shame, a loss of self, a loss of honor, and destroyed relationships are common male consequences of abortion.

In our heart of hearts, we are coming to grips with what we’re doing.We are willfully taking the lives of those we are wired to protect.

We are born to be fathers. Strong. Honorable. Self-sacrificing. Men of courage. Men of valor.

We are born to provide for the weakest among us, and that most certainly includes our own unborn children.

Father’s Day is the embodiment of all those things we love and respect about or own fathers, grandfathers, and male role models. It’s a day to honor those men who raised us, cared for us, provided for us, and protected us.

If we pause to reflect, however, it is also a day to mourn. We mourn those millions of fathers who refused to provide and protect. We mourn fathers who have no legal right to do so. We mourn the loss of faithful and true fatherhood in America. And we hope, we pray, we plead, for it to return.





headline: Why an atheist monument next to a 10 Commandments display is a good thing
byline: By Rabbi Brad Hirschfield


People entering the Bradford County Courthouse in Starke, Florida will soon be able to have a look at both a monument featuring the Ten Commandments and another one which will feature quotes celebrating secularism as well. And why not? What's good for the goose is good for the gander, as the old saying goes.

According to a report on FoxNews.com, "a North Florida county courthouse will soon be home to what's believed to be the first public monument dedicated to atheism in the nation.

"Bradford County has reached a deal to allow American Atheists to install a 1,500-pound granite bench near the county courthouse. The bench will feature quotes from Thomas Jefferson and Madalyn Murray O'Hair."

The decision to build the new monument represents a new and more mature approach to how we use public space.

Having lost the battle to have the original monument to the Ten Commandments removed, the national organization, American Atheists, has decided that it will simply erect an additional monument – one which celebrates its animating ideology.

The decision to build a monument to secularism signals that they now are willing to compete in a “game” which they previously argued should not be played at all.

Some will argue that this is a hypocritical move on the part of an organization which for years has argued that public grounds should be as neutral as possible.

Some will make that argument, but they would be wrong. Instead, the decision to build the new monument represents a new and more mature approach to how we use public space.

Rather than spend more effort on seeing how empty we can make the American public square, we need to see how expansive and inclusive it can become.

No, this is not an argument for an “anything goes” approach, but it is an invitation to change the initial response, especially from atheists, secularists, and more rigid legal liberals, to the issue of what symbols and celebrations can find a legitimate spot in American public life.

Rather than beginning with the premise that less is more, and that our collective freedom is best protected when more of who any of us is, is left at home and in private, we can shift to a “more is more” response, and cultivate a culture in which all of our freedoms are best protected when we can celebrate who we are as openly as possible.

To be clear, this attitude will frustrate many cultural conservatives when it is applied to a whole range of social and sexual issues, but that is a discussion for another time.

In the meantime, the existence of these two monuments should not been seen as in competition with each other, even though some, including many of those who supported erecting them, undoubtedly see it that way.

The presence of these two monuments, side by side, should be seen instead as complementing each other.

This is a moment that some will frame as “either/or”, when in fact, it is really about “both/and”.

Each monument celebrates a piece of what has made, and continues to make America great.

Each honors ideas without which we would be the poorer, and leaders whose leadership has enriched this nation.

While either monument alone could be construed as problematic, taken together, they are a gift to the people of Bradford County, and actually, to the rest of us as well.





headline: 'Dukes of Hazzards' star -- how a movie ticket can help save a child from slavery
byline: By John Schneider


It’s a shame we take for granted the things we have in abundance, especially when so many people lack them. I’m talking about freedom and personal independence, those basic human rights that my country protects. What’s more, I get to make a living in acting, giving me a lot of freedom for me to choose my work.

But that freedom hardly is universal. And my recent role in a movie called "Not Today" has put me on the soapbox about the millions of people living right now with no freedom at all.

In 2013—today—world over, children, women and men are trapped in the multi-billion dollar machine of buying and selling human beings. By some estimates, 27 million people right now are worked, prostituted, abused, used...with no choices, no options, no freedom. And each year their traffickers reap more than $31 billion in profits.

By some estimates, 27 million people right now are worked, prostituted, abused, used...with no choices, no options, no freedom.

You’ve probably brushed past some of the victims of trafficking—many U.S. communities harbor slaves unaware. But in countries like India, the dark business of bondage is a national disaster. And because of my work on "Not Today," I now know that every single statistic represents a human face. And even more important, I can have more than concern or outrage. I also have ways to help.

"Not Today" is the story of Caden Welles, a callous American college student on vacation with friends in Hyderabad, India. Caden is played by Hollywood Heights star Cody Longo.

Caden eventually grows a conscience and a backbone during his trip to India, but only after he refuses to help a starving young beggar girl and her father from India’s large population of “untouchables.” When he learns she’s been sold into the hands of sex traffickers, his fight to save that one girl becomes everyone's call to action.

But hear me on this. Our call isn’t just to rescue children one by one but to start where we are to help raise a defense for the most vulnerable children in slavery’s most vulnerable country. And the thing is, it’s not hard.

Because the key is education.

"Not Today" was made by Friends Church in California. After Friends’ pastor saw for himself the tragedies of India’s Dalit people, he got to know Dalit Freedom Network, which builds schools to educate the next generation. So he did the only reasonable thing he could do: He promised $20 million to help build another 200 schools. And 40 new schools already have gone up thanks to Friends Church dollars.

Next thing you know, a church is making a movie about a spoiled American kid in India, and I’m playing his dad. The church’s mission with this movie is to raise awareness, not money. All the profits the church receives from the movie go toward building more schools in India.

And in a very real way, your ticket into "Not Today" is some child’s ticket out of poverty, discrimination and, very likely, slavery. Your dollars literally multiply a trafficked child’s options.

"Not Today" is just one way to help, but it’s the door I know. Whether you see a film, support an outreach (see organizations fighting trafficking that you can connect with at www.NotTodaytheMovie.com) or pray hard (or all of the above)—these kids are helpless, but you and I are not. 

You and I have freedom, options, independence—and I hope you’ll see "Not Today." If we keep our promise to entertain you, maybe you’ll exercise your freedom to help.





headline: Advice for graduates, from a guy who got a second chance
byline: By Dick Wallrath


Dear Graduates,

You likely don’t know me, but you should listen to a few things I have to say. But first, who am I?

I am Dick Wallrath, a man who needed a second chance in life and received one. A big one.

Who are you? You’re the future. You’re the Graduating Class of 2013.

You can count on the fact that life will surprise you.

I’m on the far end of a long road you’re just starting.

And I’ve learned some important lessons. Here they are:

1. No one’s past can control your future.

I was raised in Central Texas in a tough home. My alcoholic father was physically abusive and for a while, his past controlled my future.

I grew up just like him, and my own alcoholism and violent temper cost me everything. Family. Job. Hope. Until faith in God, the kindness of someone who took a chance on me, and hard work, finally broke the cycle.

I wound up in my own business, a pretty successful one. I restored relations with many in my family.

I won’t soft sell. I had big problems. But God is bigger than the past, anyone’s, including mine, and your future is bright.

2. The future holds surprises.

It’s not that I lost everything and got back a few things. My “second chance” surprises everyone in its sheer audacity.

As a businessman and rancher, even after a slow, hard start, I’ve given millions in scholarships to young men and women in Texas through 4-H and FFA.

You know where your road starts. You can’t know where it leads.

Some folks made a movie of my life and Val Kilmer co-starred in it. You can’t make this up or predict it. But you can count on the fact that life will surprise you.

Some bad surprises: the death of my daughter—a true ray of sunshine—to illness. But many good surprises: Success. Love. The joy of giving.

3. Whatever you choose, hard work is required.

You’ll be blessed, too. Unexpectedly. Sometimes, extravagantly.

If you want to make the most of your blessings, it takes hard work.

I learned to work at business, at marriage and at family.

Even after things turned around, I had to work hard to keep them turned around. Nothing wrong with that. Nothing bad about that, either. Expect it. And do the work required.

4. If you fall, you can have a second chance.

Life throws circumstances your way. Some you don’t ask for, and don’t look for. Some you walk right into—eyes wide open. But circumstances don’t just happen to you. You happen to them, too.

In every circumstance you have a choice. When times are hard, and some will be, remember the law of second chances.

You always choose how you react. Always. And if your choices turn out wrong—and some will —have faith.

Trust God. Work hard. You will receive a second chance.
I did.





headline: A desire to be part of an 'epic struggle' -- a new profile of jihadis
byline: By Judith Miller


One of two suspects in the Boston Marathon bombing is dead. While the manhunt for the second suspect continues an influential terrorism expert says that law enforcement has learned much about the kind of persons involved in attacks like this.

While detailed information about the two suspects, who are believed to be brothers, continues to emerge, if the attack turns out to have been directed or inspired by extremist Islamists – Brian Jenkins, senior adviser to the president at RAND and widely regarded as a pioneer of terrorism research, says that previous jihadist attacks on American soil suggest that the suspects are men for whom Islam as a religion is less important than the search for adventure and a desire to be part of a historic “epic struggle.”

Contrary to popular perception, most of the foreigners involved in jihadi terror plots in America have not been Arab

He bases this conclusion on a new analysis of 41 Al Qaeda directed or “jihadist”-inspired plots in the U.S. that have resulted in 104 criminal cases in American courts involving 204 people since September 11th.

Based on the patterns in these cases, he said in an interview, the perpetrator would most likely be a “malleable youngish male, a loner, a bit of a loser.”And he is most likely to be an American.

Jenkins’ data show that 74 percent of those involved in these jihadist plots were U.S. citizens, 49 percent of whom were born in the U.S., 29 percent of whom were naturalized citizens. One quarter were born with non-Muslim names, strongly suggesting they were converts to Islam.

Some 68 percent of the 41 plots were planned by a single individual – not a “lone wolf,” says Jenkins, but what he calls a “stray dog.”

Lone wolves, he says, are “determined renegades” who often demonstrate aggressive behavior and hunt outside the pack. American jihadists, by contrast, “bark and brag,” but they are “skittish” at “sniff at the edges.” Their barking rarely results in actual bites.

Only fourteen of the 41 plots had what Jenkins calls “mature operational plans.” Ten of the 14 were FBI stings. Jenkins calls most of the plots “immature and amateurish.” Only three resulted in actual attempted attacks, two of which caused casualties.

On average, jihadists were 32 years old; their median age was 27 – slightly older than the comparable incarcerated criminal population, between 18-24, Jenkins says.

A quarter of them have never finished high school; 22 percent have high school diplomas. Thirteen percent have college degrees; six have postgraduate degrees. Forty percent of them have gone to university -- for a time. But these 204 men were more likely than the average American college student to drop out, in their cases, to pursue jihad.

Contrary to popular perception, most of the foreigners involved in these plots have not been Arab. “Somalis and Pakistanis predominate,” according to an excerpt from Jenkins’ presentation. The same is true for attacks in Europe, where a disproportionate number of plotters have been Somalis, Pakistanis, and also Algerians.

As we now know, the Boston Marathon suspects are believed to be Chechen Muslims living in the United States for a significant period of time.

The pursuit of jihad is less an expression of religious belief than a “conveyor for individual discontent,” he says. Religion, per se, is of less importance than their search for adventure and camaraderie, their desire to join a warrior elite, a secret army, and their yearning to escape situations of personal discontent. “Their lives suck,” Jenkins says.

Jenkins says he has been somewhat reassured about the boarder terror picture in the United States, by the data he analyzed for a presentation at a terrorism conference last month in Singapore.

The campaign by Al Qaeda and like-minded groups to recruit Americans to their cause has had very few takers, he concludes.

He calls such recruitment levels among the millions of Muslims in America “a very low yield.” “There is no army of sleepers, no vast Muslim underground here,” Jenkins says. Despite the proliferation of what he calls “retail outlets” for militant recruiting, such as the on-line magazine, Inspire, (whose editor was killed in a drone strike in 2011) and jihadist Internet websites, “Al Qaeda isn’t selling a lot of cars these days.”

The organization itself has faced devastating pressure. Its major training camps have been destroyed since 2001; its once easily accessible camps have been dispersed. Recruits are increasingly less competent and well-trained. Internet instruction has proven to be no substitute for hands-on-training.

Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Turkey, and Indonesia have all dismantled significant Al Qaeda networks.

Al Qaeda’s “core” or central leadership has been decimated by drones and arrests. Enhanced cooperation among law enforcement and intelligence officials throughout the world has made Qaeda’s operational environment far more hostile.

Many plots have been thwarted or foiled – 17 since 9/11 in New York alone. There has been no significant jihadist terrorist attack in the West since 2005, Jenkins says. Compare that to the 1970’s, when the nation suffered an average of 50-60 bombings a year, none of them Islamist.

Al Qaeda’s recruiting efforts in the U.S. and encouragement of what he calls “do it yourself terrorism” are failing, he says. High conviction rates (nearly 100 percent) and lengthy prison sentences (between 25 years to life) has further discouraged would-be jihadis.

Jenkins findings mirror those of Charles Kurzman, a sociologist at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and researcher at the Triangle Center on Terrorism and Homeland Security.

In a much-cited study published last year, Kurzman called the threat posed by homegrown Islamic terrorists “tiny.” His report, “Muslim-American Terrorism in the Decade Since 9/11” found that the jihadi message had little appeal to American Muslims, and that levels of both planned attacks and financial support for jihadist causes have declined since 9/11.

Jenkins cautions, however, that while the threat of Islamist terror has become more diffuse, it has not disappeared. Al Qaeda and other jihadist groups remain determined to strike and capable of strategic patience.

Though smaller and often less lethal, homegrown terrorist attacks are often more difficult to prevent, and in some cases, to solve. “The individuals involved in such plots remain dangerous and potentially lethal,” says Jenkins. “But they won’t bring down the republic.”





headline: A husband's tribute to his wife on Mother's Day
byline: By Erick Erickson


I went to my girlfriend’s apartment. She opened the door and the smell of bacon came pouring out. There were two pounds of bacon in her oven. At the time, I did not know you could cook bacon en masse in the oven. Likewise, I had no idea what any one person needed two pounds of bacon for.

“Oh I don’t,” she told me. “I need the drippings.”

We were married within a year.

It has not been the easiest time — now almost thirteen years. Within three months of marriage, both of us at twenty-five, she had a double mastectomy and I my own lesser surgeries. It was a novel way to start a marriage. 

But now we have two wonderful children who always delight and surprise us. Our great controversy now is whether to finally tell the seven year old it is “route guidance” and not “Ralph guidance.” It is so endearing, but she cannot figure out why Ralph has a female voice. The four year old presents his own, all boy, problems. Waking Dad up at sunrise by body slamming is not as appealing as it might sound. Just the other day he surmised that if the sandman leaves sand in your eyes at night, the boogie man must be responsible for the boogers in your nose.

Through it all I travel a great deal. Last month, according to Delta, I traveled 13,500 miles. While I am away, my wife is the full time mother hen. She is ever present in the kids’ lives. Even when I am home, I work three jobs so she can be home with the kids. They bake, they play outside, she sews an assortment of clothes, quilts, and travel bags. She shuttles them to school, ukulele lessons, and doctors’ appointments.

While carrying our now four year old, my wife decided she needed exercise. She took up skateboarding. Her doctor was impressed. A few weeks ago, having spent the last few years growing her hair out, she cut it off, gave it locks of love, and came home with some not very subtle purple highlights. It was actually pretty awesome.

Some moms join the junior league and introduce their children to high society. Some moms let their children run wild through the woods and streets. My children are fortunate to have a mom who rides her skateboard with them, sits out under a tress sewing binding onto quilts she’s made while the kids play, and makes homemade buttermilk biscuits as an ultimate comfort food. When she has quiet time, the sounds of the sewing machine fill the house, interspersed the with the subtle sound of hands on a keyboard as she searches Pinterest for new projects, catches up with friends on Facebook, or browses the Pioneer Woman’s website for new recipes.

The kids’ drawings have been turned to needlepoint creations as teachers’ gifts. Our bedspread is homemade. Our garden delivers the herbs she planted for our food, along with assorted kinds of mint for juleps. I had to start going to a trainer because of her cooking. The other day talking to Governor Perry of Texas, she overheard me ask him why something in Texas was so great. Without missing a beat, she answered for him, “Because they all pack heat.” This is the wife who, a few years ago, only wanted a shotgun for Christmas. She wants to go shoot skeet with the governor of Texas and get another tattoo with her friends from church. Now she has the kids all wanting motorcycles, so long as she too can have one. That may be a bridge too far in our relationship.

My wife is my partner and the manager of the household while I am in front of a television camera or behind a microphone or keyboard. With her I have learned that the process of marriage is not about being happy, but about becoming one soul together. We become, slowly and sometimes with difficulty, an extension of each other hoping to draw out each other’s better nature.

I worked late Wednesday night. Up before the sun or the rooster and not done until the sun had set, barely seeing the kids or my wife though my office and studio for television and radio are all behind sound proof doors in our own home, I finally finished all I had to do. I opened the sound proof doors and the smells of home cooking poured in. 

There in the kitchen, at the end of the day and darkness settling in outside, was a pile of homemade biscuits, grits, a bigger pile of bacon, and pajama clad smiles from the little ones. Breakfast for supper is comfort food in our house. It would not have happened but for my wife, my best friend, and my children’s mother — all one person indispensable to my children and me.





headline: A son's journey to understand his father's war and life
byline: By Dale Maharidge


Each Christmas when I was a boy in the early 1960s, my mother boosted me through a hatch into our attic. I’d toss down empty boxes stored there for wrapping presents. Nearby was a trunk filled with WWII mementos my father brought back from his Pacific island battles.

There was a U.S. Marine code manual. Secret landing maps. Japanese photographs. And other items, including a passport issued by the Imperial Japanese Government.

When I was old enough to sneak up there, I’d stare at the mug shot in the passport of a gentle-looking man. His name was Seiichi Zayasu--it was written both in Japanese and English. My father, Steve Maharidge, must have killed him to end up with the document. Who was Mr. Zayasu? Little did I know that decades later I would find out.

My father wanted no part in World War II--he’d ignored three draft notices in 1943 and only “volunteered” for the Marines after police came knocking.

Dad never talked much about the war. He had a sometimes explosive rage. I connected this to his being in combat. As a boy I dreamed about going to the war places with him so that I could understand his demons.

He died in 2000 with the war’s role in his life remaining a mystery.

I then spent the next 12 years finding 29 men from his unit. I learned that he suffered two blast concussions on Okinawa and a near-fatal mortar explosion on Guam in 1944.

Dad had recuperated from the bleeding wound. But experts told me he certainly suffered traumatic brain injury, TBI. The brain does not heal. This explained his temper, a symptom of TBI.

I came to peace with his anger. But unfinished business remained. I needed to return the passport to the Zayasu family.

I flew to Okinawa and went to the village of Okuma with an interpreter. Seiichi’s address was a vacant lot. Across a lane was a home on which was a name: “Zayasu.”

Filled with dread, I knocked. An elderly man opened the door. Seijin Zayasu told me that he was Seiichi’s nephew.

“I think my father killed your uncle,” I sputtered.

As my words were translated, puzzlement filled Seijin’s face, which turned into a look that considered me crazy. Seiichi was too old to be drafted--he was 49 in 1945, Seijin said. He’d died in a 1952 construction accident. Seiichi, his wife, and seven children had fled to the mountains before the American landing on April 1, 1945.

I'd shaped a false narrative my entire life. Dad had gone into their empty house. He was a thief, not a killer in this case. I imagined Dad laughing somewhere. It’s the kind of thing he would have found humorous. I was happy that my father hadn’t slain Seiichi. 

I found my way to Moritake Zayasu, Seiichi’s son. In 1945 he was age ten. Japanese military propagandists said Americans would shoot civilians, so the family hid until after the battle.

Moritake’s parents weren’t upset about missing things when they came home. They were glad to be alive. Theirs was one of the few Okinawan families that hadn’t lost anyone during the 82-day battle. An estimated 150,000 civilians were killed, the vast majority from American shelling and bombs.

Moritake asked why my father kept the passport. He wasn't angry--just baffled. I had no answer. All but one man I found from Dad’s company took souvenirs from bodies and houses. Perhaps Dad saw it as “exotic,” a token to remember his journey halfway across the globe to fight people he did not hate.

Ed Hoffman, who was in Dad’s company, had Japanese photographs. In the 1990s he sent them to an Okinawa newspaper hoping the families might see them. Stories abound today about Americans repatriating items from that war nearly 70 years ago.

What motivates us to do this?

Perhaps it’s our trying to cope with the inherent insanity of war. Nations engage in conflict but the ultimate cost is not borne by politicians or generals.

My father wanted no part in World War II--he’d ignored three draft notices in 1943 and only “volunteered” for the Marines after police came knocking. As civilians, the Zayasu family also didn’t want war.

My father was powerless against the collision of nations. Though my fantasy about coming to Okinawa with him never happened, I felt he was with me in spirit as I sought healing in one small act that I could control for him.

"My father entered your house,” I said to Moritake, “and took some things. So, I apologize in his behalf, and return them to you."

I set out items besides the passport that were connected to it--including a wallet and a baby picture.

Up to that point, Moritake had been reserved. His eyes now widened.

"I think this might be me!" Moritake exclaimed as he held the image of the baby.





headline: A realistic, workable plan to reduce violence in America
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow, Dan Winslow


Like all Americans, we have been shocked and saddened in recent years by repeated mass shootings and the loss of innocent lives.

Our collective national outrage has been translated by state legislators and members of Congress into calls for more gun control. 

Advocates of gun control forget that there are many methods by which disturbed people can inflict senseless violence. The worst mass death in a school in the United States killed 38 children with homemade explosives. 

The recent mass stabbing of 14 college students in Texas is instructive. The underlying problem common to all the recent mass shootings has been untreated or undertreated mental illness.

A seriously mentally ill person in the United States is three times more likely to be incarcerated than hospitalized.

We, a former judge and a forensic psychiatrist, prefer to solve the underlying problem rather than point fingers at guns.

It is time that we work together to develop a plan to address the real issue of violence in our nation. We propose to fix our broken, failing mental health care system—and, largely, by re-tasking existing resources to more effective ends.

More than thirty years ago, legal interventions and dramatic advancements in psychopharmacology provided the impetus for a mass exodus from public mental health institutions to community settings.

This well-intended move was predicated on the development of a community mental health center network. An unintended consequence, however, has been that many deinstitutionalized mentally ill clients are receiving little or no treatment. 

Moreover, current insurance plans often favor short-term or relatively anemic interventions, rather than long-term solutions, for those struggling with psychiatric disorders. 

According to a report by the National Sheriffs’ Association and the Treatment Advocacy Center, a seriously mentally ill person in the United States is three times more likely to be incarcerated than hospitalized. And since jails and prisons are not created to be de facto mental hospitals, there are a number of problems associated with placing large numbers of seriously mentally ill individuals into jails and prisons. In particular, mentally ill inmates cost much more. 

In Texas prisons, for example, the average prisoner costs the state about $22,000 per year, but prisoners with mental illness cost between $30,000 and $50,000. In addition to the costs of incarceration, recidivism rates for mentally ill inmates are higher, their stays are longer, they are more difficult to manage, and they are more likely to commit suicide.

The Community Mental Health Services Block Grant is an important source of federal funding for innovative community-based mental health services for youth and adults with mental illnesses. The Block Grant, which is administered by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), is currently funded at $421 million. In addition to this block grant funding, multiple federal agencies fund various aspects of the criminal justice system, mental health and health care system, law enforcement and corrections functions at the state level.

Is it possible to retask these existing resources, without increasing overall spending to this end. 

How? 

Through the development by each state of what we call a Tiered Outpatient Protocol, or “TOP,” to provide appropriate outpatient evaluation and treatment and to more accurately identify persons who pose a significant risk of harm to self or others before the harm has occurred.

TOP would consist of three basic steps for outpatient evaluation and treatment:

Step One: Petition to Court

Under TOP, three individuals, including a psychiatrist or psychologist, first-degree relative together with any other third party may petition the court directly to assign a person to TOP who they have reason to believe presents a substantial risk of harm to self or others. 

TOP also can receive indirect referrals from a teacher, a police officer, a nurse or doctor or any mental health professional. 

Such referrals are first triaged to the nearest community mental health center crisis teams for assessment. If the assessment deems the individual in need of services, then the assessing clinician from the crisis team may petition the court directly. 

Inclusion in TOP is based on a judicial finding after hearing of substantial risk of harm to self or others. 

It is important to note that mental illness alone, such as an anxiety disorder (like panic disorder or PTSD) or major depression , will not result in a person being assigned to TOP, unless the court makes a preliminary finding that the person poses a substantial risk of harm to self or others.

Step One is similar to existing judicial mental health review that already exists in the states. Referral to TOP by the court does not appear on any background check or criminal history and cannot be used as a factor in determining eligibility for possession of any firearm.

Step Two: Court-Clinic (or Equivalent) Evaluation

Once assigned to TOP by a judge, a forensic psychiatrist or forensic psychologist meets with the person to make the determination as to whether the person enrolled should 1) be immediately hospitalized 2) have access to firearms and/or 3) be receiving enforced outpatient therapy, including medication. 

Any person who is deemed unable to access firearms (TOP PLUS) is presumed to require outpatient treatment, and any person who is hospitalized has a one-year prohibition from being licensed to carry firearms, but those who receive outpatient treatment are not necessarily prohibited from firearm possession. 

The judge conducts an expedited hearing to make these determinations based on the testimony of the expert, and the person has the right to be heard in opposition with full due process rights under the Constitution. 

This Step Two is similar to existing judicial mental health review that already exists in the states. 
TOP PLUS clients have their TOP PLUS status noted on background check for firearms, but their TOP PLUS status cannot be used to discriminate for matters not affecting life or safety of themselves or others.

Step Three: Court-Ordered Outpatient Treatment

Step Three addresses key failings in the mental health system in the United States: the lack of in-patient mental hospital beds and the lack of predictable and compulsory outpatient treatment for individuals who pose a danger to others.

The court will have the authority to order and compel outpatient treatment for TOP and TOP PLUS individuals, including after further hearing (as already required by law), medication compliance.

The clinician to whom the individual is then assigned (from the general psychiatric/psychological/counseling community) is responsible only to treat the individual as he/she would normally. 

Upon completion of the treatment or as treatment progresses, the clinician can certify that the TOP PLUS condition has resolved and that the person no longer is a danger to self or others,, which would then also be noted in any background check. This provision is important for acute situations that are satisfactorily resolved by treatment and medication compliance. 

Third-party insurers may be liable for providing less than the contracted maximum treatment for any TOP PLUS client.

A TOP client may petition the court, after 12 months, for excusal from the program. The forensic clinician (psychiatrist or psychologist) who first determined the care to be provided, or his/her successor, may oppose the action. 

TOP deserves consideration by lawmakers who wrongly believe that gun control is the answer to ending mass killings in America. We believe, instead, that repairing and reinforcing our mental health care system is the most urgent issue at hand.



Dr. Keith Ablow is a psychiatrist and member of the Fox News Medical A-Team. Dr. Ablow can be reached at info@keithablow.com.





headline: '42' presents a shining chapter in the America saga
byline: By James P. Pinkerton


The United States has always been a great country, but the new movie “42” shows how it became an even greater country, a more perfect union. Jackie Robinson, the first black player in the modern era of major league baseball, wore #42 when he made his debut for the Brooklyn Dodgers on April 15, 1947--and so entered into the American pantheon. 

Robinson was not only a gifted ballplayer--although joining the majors at age 28, he earned a lifetime batting average of .311 and stole 197 bases during his ten-year career--he was also a remarkably motivated and self-disciplined man. 

That is, in breaking the “color line” of baseball, he was willing and able to brave his way through the storm of insults--and beanball pitches--that were hurled at him. He understood that if he yelled back, or hit back, the resulting fracas would derail his effort to integrate the national pastime. And so if “42” plays up the heroism angle, it’s justified, because he was an American hero. 

If “42” plays up the heroism angle, it’s justified, because Jackie Robinson was an American hero.  

Yet as “42” reminds us, Robinson was not alone. So let’s look at some of the lead characters in the film, each of whom played a significant role in this noble experiment:

Jackie Robinson, played by Chadwick Boseman. We see Robinson from 1945 to 1947, as he moves from the Negro Leagues to the Dodgers farm system to to Dodgers themselves. Along the way, he is mentored by Branch Rickey, the Dodgers’ general manager.

When Rickey tells Robinson that he will have to turn the other cheek at racist vitriol from players and fans alike, Robinson exclaims: “You want a player who doesn't have the guts to fight back?” And Rickey responds, “No. I want a player who’s got the guts not to fight back.” Robinson considers the situation for a moment, and then answers, “You give me a uniform, you give me a number on my back, I’ll give you the guts.” 

This history has been recounted many times before. Robinson himself appeared in a 1950 movie, “The Jackie Robinson Story,” a film that still holds up today. And yet “42” brings a new vividness to the story, including its loving recreation of the look of the 1940s, from the clothes to the cars, and especially the baseball uniforms.

During that 1947 season, despite vicious heckling--depicted in one particularly harrowing scene in which the main heckler is the manager of an opposing team--Robinson hit .297, as well as led the National League in stolen bases, with 29. He was named Rookie of the Year. 

Branch Rickey, played by Harrison Ford. Rickey was a true strategist--not only for baseball, but also for America. He helped pioneer the use of batting helmets, batting cages, and pitching machines, and he also institutionalized the farm-team system. As he said, “Luck is the residue of design.” That is, design a good system, and good luck has a way of falling into your lap. 

Similarly, Rickey planned out the integration of baseball. He had been thinking about it for years, but he waited for the right black player to be the spearhead. 

Rickey figured that bringing black players would be good for the Dodgers’ competitive advantage, but he also believed in equality of opportunity. As he says in the film, “There was something unfair at the heart of the game I loved.” And so we might note: Historical greatness, too, is the residue of design. 

We might also observe that Rickey was inspired by faith. Rickey’s full given name was Wesley Branch Rickey--as in John Wesley, the Methodist evangelist. In explaining why he chose Robinson, Rickey says, half-humorously, “Robinson is a Methodist, I’m a Methodist. God is a Methodist.” God might not have a denomination, but He was obviously blessing Rickey’s effort. 

Leo Durocher, played by Christopher Meloni. Watching Durocher, one is reminded of Durocher’s dynamic, even manic, energy; he was a major figure in the game, as a player, coach, and manager, for more than 40 years. In a standout scene, Durocher persuades his players to get with the Robinson program: “I don’t care if the guy is yellow or black, or if he has stripes like a zebra”--he is playing as a Dodger, and that’s that. “What's more,” Durocher adds with a wink, “I say he can make us all rich.” That is, he will help us win. And that’s what happened: the Dodgers won the NL Pennant in ’47. 

Pee Wee Reese, played by Lucas Black.Born in Kentucky, Reese admits to nostalgic Confederate sympathies, and is frightened enough by the anti-Robinson reaction that he shows Rickey a death threat he has just received--whereupon Rickey shows him a file-folder full of death threats that he has received.

In the end, called by his own conscience, Reese makes a point of putting a friendly arm on Robinson’s shoulder, on-field, in full display, at the beginning of an game in Cincinnati--a city just across the river from Kentucky--ignoring the boos from the fans.

Baseball, played by the Brooklyn Dodgers and other teams.Before Robinson, black athletes such as boxer Jack Johnson and runner Jesse Owen had risen to the top, but they played solo sports. In “42,” we see a black man working well with white men.

To be sure, we see the filmmaker’s obvious love of baseball, including an appreciation of the skill and spirit that a batter needs to face up to a pitcher at the plate, knowing that the next pitch could be aimed at his head. Players also need to run the bases, realizing that every slide is a high-speed human collision. And on the diamond, every fielder must be ready to charge straight into a barrier as they run to catch a fly ball. So yes, the excellence of the individual player is always on full display in baseball--and that excellence is color-blind. 

Yet at the same time, in “42” we also see an exaltation of team spirit and team play. Within the team, stars shine. Still, to win, even the brightest star needs the team; at its best, baseball is all for one, and one for all. And that was the story of the pennant-winning Dodgers in 1947, and for many years thereafter. During the Robinson era, the Dodgers won five more pennants, and finally, in 1955, they also won a World Series. 

America, played by the 150 million Americans. The film, set in the optimistic afterglow of WW 2, captures a powerful sentiment of the era: If the US was to be a force for good in the world, it had to lead by example on the home front. 

Just a few years before, in 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt had established the Fair Employment Practices Commission, declaring, “There shall be no discrimination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race, creed, color, or national origin.”

That’s how we won the war--as a united country. And so a few years later, it made sense for Rickey to say, “We won over fascism in Germany. It’s time we won over racism at home.”

Rickey was right. And that was how Jackie Robinson, supported by many millions of Americans, wrote a new and glorious chapter in the long chronicle of how these United States became that more perfect union.





headline: If President Obama was a CEO, DOJ would hold him accountable for scandals
byline: By Hans von Spakovsky, Daniel Dew


IRS… Benghazi… AP… the scandals are mounting in D.C. Who’s to blame?

Well, if you use the standards that federal prosecutors apply to corporations, the president would be held legally responsible for any wrongdoing by federal workers—whether he knew what they were doing or not.

Like Sergeant Shultz from “Hogan’s Heroes,” President Obama insists that he knew nothing about the IRS targeting Tea Party and other conservative groups. He only learned about it from media coverage of the Treasury’s Inspector General Report.

Similarly, he knew nothing about the Justice Department’s subpoena of phone records of AP reporters and editors.

For years, DOJ has used a “responsible corporate officer doctrine” to prosecute business owners and corporate officers for crimes committed by their subordinates

As for Benghazi, we now know that his subordinates in the White House and the State Department edited the talking points that misled the public about what happened on September 11, 2012 although we still don’t know who in the line of command nixed any attempt to rescue Ambassador Stevens and the other Americans under attack by terrorists.

Let’s suppose he’s telling the truth: The president had no idea of what his subordinates were up to in any of these instances. How, then, could he be held legally responsible for what happened?

If Mr. Obama were CEO of a corporation rather than commander-in-chief, the Justice Department would certainly hold him accountable.

For years, DOJ has used a “responsible corporate officer doctrine” to prosecute business owners and corporate officers for crimes committed by their subordinates—even when the bosses had no knowledge of, much less involvement in, the criminal conduct.

To convict a business executive, all the Justice Department has to do is prove that (1) an employee did something illegal on the job and (b) the executive was above that employee in the corporate organizational chart.

The President’s own Food and Drug Administration revised its regulatory procedures manual in 2011 to make it clear that a corporate officer can be criminally liable “without proof that the corporate official acted with intent or even negligence, and even if such corporate official did not have any actual knowledge of, or participation in, the specific offense.” The key is whether the “official had the authority to correct or prevent the violation.”

President Obama may well have been clueless that Eric Holder’s Justice Department had secretly seized AP phone records, or that IRS officials were slow-walking tax-exemption applications from conservative organizations that (according to the IG Report) had “Tea Party” or “Patriot” in their names, “criticize how the country is being run,” or were “educating on the constitution and bill of rights.”

But the President is legally the head of the executive branch. In the federal government’s organization chart, he is above everyone at State, Justice, and the IRS. He and his immediate subordinates, the cabinet secretaries, are responsible for the actions of all those in the departments they supervise and the policies those employees follow. The enforcement and regulatory policies of the executive branch are, in fact, the special purview of the President, and he has “the authority to correct or prevent” the conduct that occurred.

So should the same rules apply to the government that apply to American businesses? If the Justice Department believes that corporate officers and managers can be held responsible for their employees’ misdeeds–even when they knew nothing about them–shouldn’t a cabinet secretary or the President be held responsible for their employees’ misdeeds?

We won’t argue that the most senior federal officials in the executive branch should be held legally responsible for the actions of people not under their direct control. But the same rule should apply to corporate officers being prosecuted by the federal government. It is a sad day when the government holds itself to a much lower standard of responsibility than it applies to everyone else.



Hans von Spakovsky is a Senior Legal Fellow in The Heritage Foundation’s Center for Legal and Judicial Studies. He is a former Commissioner at the Federal Election Commission and lawyer in the Justice Department.





headline: Could a Texas judge derail Obama's DREAM Act amnesty plans?
byline: By Hans von Spakovsky


So maybe the president can’t rewrite the law as he pleases! That’s the early word from a federal judge in Texas.

On April 24, Judge Reed O’Connor concluded that the Obama administration’s policy of granting de facto amnesty to some people who entered the country illegally violates federal immigration law.

He did not issue an injunction, although that may still happen.The judge is holding off on issuing a final ruling until both parties to the lawsuit file briefs on one remaining issue.

Judge O’Connor is hearing "Christopher Crane v. Napolitano," a case in which nine agents of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) are suing their boss, ICE Director John Morton, and his boss, Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano.

“Discretion” Judge O'Connor suggested does not entail the power to create new law.

At issue is a 2012 directive from Napolitano barring ICE agents from starting deportation proceedings against unlawful immigrants who:

- are not yet 30

- were younger than 16 when they entered the country illegally

- have lived here for five years

- have graduated or are attending high school or have served in the military and

- have no felony convictions.

The directive further instructed ICE agents to halt deportation proceedings already underway for people fitting these criteria. Instead, the agents were ordered to grant them and others in the same category work authorization if they qualified.

Clearly, this was an attempt by the administration to enact—by executive fiat—most of the DREAM immigration reforms that Congress failed to enact last year.

ICE agents challenged the DHS directive, claiming that it compels them to violate the law or face disciplinary action. Federal immigration law, they say, requires them to initiate removal proceedings against anyone they detain.

The agents also charge that the directive violates the federal Administrative Procedure Act because it was implemented without the public notice and comment required for all new government regulations.

On almost all of these issues, the judge ruled against the government. There is no question, he said, that the law “mandates the initiation of removal proceedings whenever an immigration officer encounters an illegal alien who is not ‘clearly and beyond a doubt entitled to be admitted.’”

The administration argued that the law applies only to unlawful immigrants encountered at a “port of entry.” But once someone makes it past the border, the government claimed, the DHS Secretary has wide “prosecutorial discretion” as to whether or not to commence removal proceedings.

Napolitano’s lawyers even argued that the word “shall” in the statute (as in “the alien shall be detained”) doesn’t have the plain meaning normally given to that command.

The court disagreed. “Discretion” does not entail the power to create new law.

Judge O’Connor found “…DHS cannot implement measures that are incompatible with Congressional intent.”

The judge did not issue an injunction because the government raised a new issue very late in the case. The administration claimed that, since the ICE agents are career employees, their claims are “employment-related” and can only be brought through the civil service merit system.The judge requested additional briefing on this issue by May 6.

The judge also did not rule on another question: whether DHS can dismiss or suspend deportation proceedings once they have been initiated.The agents didn’t raise that issue.

This is an important decision nonetheless. A court has held that the administration does not have unbridled discretion to simply ignore a law it doesn’t like. But there is no doubt that Judge O’Connor’s final decision – when it comes – will be appealed.





headline: Is Obama already a lame duck?
byline: By Liz Peek


The recent terror attack in Boston is tragic on many fronts -- for the victims, for the now-anxious city, and for those who celebrate our open and tolerant society.

Politically, too, the bombings take a toll. For President Obama, a renewed focus on terrorism further distracts the country from the bold liberal agenda proposed in his State of the Union Address earlier this year. 

As he struggles to lead the country through this most recent assault, the president must be wondering how he can regain his post-election momentum. It won’t be easy.

The White House has been drained by numerous defections and legislative defeats, sapping the momentum of Mr. Obama’s second term. 

While it is not uncommon for an incumbent to see his polls nosedive after reelection, Mr. Obama’s downturn is worse than that suffered by George W. Bush or Bill Clinton.

Whispers suggest the unthinkable: President Obama is already on the shelf.

Barely two months into his second term, President Obama’s approval ratings have tumbled into negative territory, with 48% of the country disapproving of his performance compared to 47% who give him a thumbs-up. While it is not uncommon for an incumbent to see his polls nosedive after reelection, Mr. Obama’s downturn is worse than that suffered by George W. Bush or Bill Clinton, who was famously embroiled in the Monica Lewinsky affair.

Events beyond Mr. Obama’s control have sidetracked him from his to-do list, and from the issues that matter most to voters.

The terrible slaughter at Newtown thrust him into fiercely advocating gun control, which appealed to many voters but proved politically toxic.

The bipartisan defeat of proposed gun safety legislation in the Senate incensed the president, who delivered a withering critique of the failed vote. Not only did the legislation go down in flames; Mr. Obama’s leadership credentials surely suffered as well.

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court hearings vaulted same-sex marriage onto the front page, and Mr. Obama has “evolved,” but few will credit the tardy president with having led the equality chorus.

Immigration reform looms larger in the country’s psyche – some 70% of the country favors resolution of this national embarrassment -- but the president has been sidelined as Congress has led the crucial debate. Like the senior without a prom date, Mr. Obama awaits the call.

Meanwhile, in coming months voters will begin to realize the ill effects of ObamaCare, now rumbling menacingly forward.

The popular aspects of the bill (like being able to keep children on your policy) are in place, but have largely failed to impress voters. A recent poll from the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 42% of those surveyed oppose the bill, compared to only 36% that supports it. Even Democrats have soured on the measure; last November 72% embraced the legislation; today only 57% have a favorable view.

This is not unexpected.

The Obama White House did an excellent job of keeping bad news about ObamaCare off the front page in the run-up to the election. These days, the soaring costs of private insurance (in California Blue Cross is proposing a premium hike of 26% and elsewhere companies are being warned that costs could double in coming years), the imposition of hefty new taxes to cover the cost of expanding our health care safety net, the likelihood that your policy will have to be rewritten to comply with top-down rules, the rising cost of insurance exchanges, worsening news on the bill’s overall expense – in short, the inevitable consequences of trying to corral one sixth of the economy are coming home to roost.

As Americans discover the mess their president has visited upon them, they will come to view ObamaCare as the ultimate act of hubris. Even one of the bill’s architects, Senator Jay Rockefeller, recently described the healthcare law as “beyond comprehension.”

Only an academic with no real world experience could imagine that bureaucrats could successfully manage such a giant part of our economy; only an academic who never studied the rise and fall of the Soviet Union. 

Republicans will be quick to remind voters as we approach the midterm elections that President Obama spent his political capital pushing this legacy-building law, instead of adopting measures that might have rebooted our economy. Even today, he is focused on anything and everything but the issue which still matters most – jobs.

Instead, he continues to push an agenda primarily focused on wealth redistribution, which is the unifying theme behind his recently unveiled budget. 

The president calls for higher taxes – again –completely indifferent to the notion that tax hikes penalize growth. Unfortunately (and unexpectedly) for the president, the back and forth about the Sequester seriously undermined his credibility on federal budgets.

Thanks to the efforts of Senator Tom Coburn, among others, Americans were introduced to the inexhaustible lunacies supported by our bloated federal spending.

The president’s argument that outlays could not be reeled in without starving our young and closing down our airports was exposed for the drivel it is.

Meanwhile, President Obama has adopted a novel approach – talking to the opposition. After four years of “I won” hauteur, the president has actually dined with Republicans. In a follow-up gesture, he even incorporated into his budget a modest change in Social Security benefits that was widely endorsed by anyone with a calculator and a hope of keeping our entitlement programs from sinking the nation.

That minor gesture towards fiscal sanity has set the left howling. A recent article in the New York Times envisions a liberal challenger emerging in time for the 2016 race. Republicans would rejoice to see harmonious Democrats revert to their fractious mean, but it won’t do Obama’s standing any good. 

Had Mr. Obama followed President Clinton by tacking right earlier – after his bruising midterm “comeuppance” -- and had he adopted proposals designed to beef up demand, the economy might be pulling free and putting millions back to work. With that wind at his back, the president would have enjoyed smoother sailing in his second term.

He had a shot. Instead, he may soon be tagged as lame duck. If it quacks like a lame duck…



Liz Peek is a writer who contributes frequently to FoxNews.com. She is a financial columnist who also writes for The Fiscal Times. For more visit LizPeek.com. Follow her on Twitter@LizPeek.



headline: ObamaCare turns three -- a checkup on the rhetoric vs. the reality
byline: By Paul Howard


Saturday marks ObamaCare’s third anniversary, and President Obama and Democrats across the country will surely celebrate its greatest achievement to date: survival. The health care law narrowly survived a Supreme Court challenge, repeated attempts by House Republicans to repeal it and, with President Obama’s reelection, seems to be set for implementation next year.

But survival is a pretty low bar for the law, and far from the lofty claims made on its behalf.

In 2009, President Obama said that “it’s important for us to make sure that 46 million people who don’t have health insurance get it. And I think it’s important for us to bend the curve, separate and apart from coverage issues, just because the system we have right now is unsustainable and hugely inefficient and uncompetitive.”

On net, we found evidence that ObamaCare will do very little to slow U.S. health care spending, and may actually increase it.

The Obama administration’s claim that the law would rein in spending undoubtedly persuaded wavering Congressional Democrats to push it across the finish line.

In a new report from the Manhattan Institute, Rhetoric and Reality, my colleague Yevgeniy Feyman and I try to summarize the best evidence to date on the impact that the law is having on health care costs today – and whether or not it is likely to contain costs in the future.

Based on the best currently available data, we project that ObamaCare will increase, not decrease, U.S. health care spending. 

Certainly, the near term trends aren’t favorable for the law. Since the passage of the law, household premiums for private insurance have increased by 11.3 percent, outpacing even the growth of medical inflation (6.8 percent).Last year, Congressional analysts also projected that employer-based family coverage will cost $20,000 by 2016, an increase of 27 percent over 2012 rates. Looking a little further ahead, premiums are expected to rise steadily through 2021, except for a brief dip in 2014.

(The “dip” kicks in when ObamaCare’s exchange subsidies begin, transferring costs from individuals and families to taxpayers. But shifting costs is not the same thing as containing costs.)

In fact, a recent survey of insurance companies by the American Action Forum, a think tank, found that market reforms included in ObamaCare will spike health insurance premiums, particularly for younger and healthier people. ObamaCare requires insurers to sell richer benefit packages, but the main cost increases come from new rules like rating bands, that limit the discounts insurers can offer to younger policyholders compared to older ones, and prohibit premium variations based on gender and health status.

ObamaCare also includes new taxes on everything from insurance companies to prescription drugs, costs likely to be passed along to families and small businesses shopping for coverage.

ObamaCare didn’t invent America’s health care woes, and shouldn’t be blamed for the ones we already have. The U.S. already spends over $2 trillion on health care, approaching 18 percent of U.S. GDP. And health care costs were rising much faster than income or GDP growth for decades before ObamaCare came along.

But the point of the law was to fix the system – not add to its burdens. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) predicts that the law will add about $500 billion to U.S. spending between 2012 and 2021.

To be fair, ObamaCare does contain several small pilot projects, all of them well meaning, designed to reform the supply or delivery of health care. But existing pilot programs thus far have had mixed or disappointing results. And some projects, like the widespread implementation of electronic health records, seem to have increased costs in some cases, by making it easier for providers to bill for additional services.

Other experiments, like Medicare’s Accountable Care Organization (ACO) program, may also be cost increasing, by encouraging hospital consolidation that allows them to increase prices.

One area where ObamaCare devotes far too little attention is reforming the demand for health care services.For all of our talk about the crushing cost of American health care, on average, consumers only spend about 11 cents out of pocket for health care – the fifth lowest average among OECD countries. And research suggests that when out of pocket spending is lower, health care spending increases because consumers are only paying a tiny fraction of the total bill.

By 2021, ObamaCare will push U.S. out of pocket spending even lower than it is today, to just over 9 percent. This may accelerate price increases by insulating the newly insured largely from the costs of the care they consume.

Defenders of the law like to point out that CBO scores the law as reducing the deficit.But this is only because the law brings in more revenues (through taxes and penalties) than it spends over a ten year period. And recently, health care cost growth has slowed somewhat. But there is no reason to attribute the slowdown to ObamaCare, since its main provisions haven’t even kicked in. And lower Medicare spending is largely (75 percent) attributable to lower drug spending in Medicare’s Part D benefit, which started in 2006.

On net, we found evidence that ObamaCare will do very little to slow U.S. health care spending, and may actually increase it.

While the Congressional debate has focused on repealing ObamaCare, a more politically palatable option may be reforming it by focusing on demand side reforms – like moving most non-poor Americans into higher deductible health plans paired with savings accounts and lowering subsidies on the exchanges (currently subsidies extend to families making up to $94,000 annually) to focus on low-income families, and building effective systems that allow consumers to easily compare the price and quality of health care options.

An anniversary is supposed to be the time for celebration. For ObamaCare, its third anniversary signifies how little the law has accomplished, and the enormous health care challenges still facing the country.





headline: 'I’m a born-free American woman' -- my government has forgotten its place
byline: By Becky Gerritson


Editor's note: On Tuesday, June 4, Becky Gerritson, president of Wetumpka Tea Party in Alabama, testified before Congress about the IRS allegedly targeting her organization.Here is her full statement to the House Ways and Means Full Committee Hearing on Organizations Targeted by the Internal Revenue Service for Their Personal Beliefs.

Congressman Camp,

Thank you for inviting me here to speak today. And to the rest of the committee, thank you so much for listening.

I’d like to begin with a brief statement. I know that you are primarily interested in hearing about the abuses of the Internal Revenue Service.

But I believe that it is critically important that you and your constituencies know, not just what those abuses were, but what exactly the IRS was trying to stifle. In order to paint a clear picture, I need to explain how the Wetumpka Tea Party came into being.

I am a born-free, American woman – wife, mother and citizen – and I’m telling MY government that you have forgotten your place.

My husband and I had never been involved in politics before 2008. We’ve always been patriotic and deeply proud of our country. We’ve always felt that the United States IS the greatest country on earth.

In September 2008, when we had our first $700 billion bailout, we, along with millions of Americans, were VERY concerned! That bailout was confirmation that our government was out-of-control. But just a few months later, in January of 2009, we learned that our government was going to spend another $787 billion. This money went to foreign nations, failing banks, and unproductive industries. We were worried and knew we had to do something to sound the alarm.

We knew that the government had gone far beyond its habitual, deficit spending. The government was mortgaging America’s future. And we knew that Washington wasn’t going to stop by itself.

In the spring of 2009, we learned others were organizing “Tea Party” events around the nation to educate and empower concerned citizens who believed their government was out of control, so we made our plans.

My husband and I filled out a permit to meet at a local park in our small town. My daughter and I walked through neighborhoods handing out flyers for the on April 15th event. When the day arrived, we were blown away by the large crowd. A few politicians came also, but they didn’t speak. We wanted to give ordinary people a chance to air their concerns.

Our event had no party affiliation. I could not tell you if attendees were Republicans, Democrats or independents – it did not matter. The only political notion expressed was the one we collectively felt: That our “representative government” had failed us.

And that was the birth of the Wetumpka Tea Party. There are no dues, no price for memberships. Our events are mostly educational. Whatever expenses are incurred are paid from donations and T-shirt sales.

In Wetumpka, we are patriotic Americans. We peaceably assemble. We petition our government. We exercise our right to free speech. And we don’t understand why our government tried to stop us.

I am not here today as a serf or a vassal. I am not begging my lords for mercy. I am a born-free, American woman – wife, mother and citizen – and I’m telling MY government that you have forgotten your place. It is not your responsibility to look out for my well-being or monitor my speech. It is not your right to assert an agenda. The posts you occupy exist to preserve American liberty. You have sworn to perform that duty. And you have faltered.

The abuses I will discuss today occurred on your watch. It is your responsibility to make sure it doesn’t happen again.

THE FACTS OF MY CASE:
We applied for our 501(c)4 in October 2010. Our $850.00 application fee was cashed seven days from the date our application was mailed.

We received a letter from Robert Choi, dated Nov, 2, 2010 stating that our application and user fee payment had been received. It stated that we could expect to be contacted within 90 days.
However, the IRS did not initiate ANY contact with us for another four hundred and fifty nine days. That was when I received a letter from the Cincinnati office dated February 3rd 2012.

The letter stated that they could not process our application until we completed the enclosed questionnaire which requested approximately ninety pieces of additional information about our organization.

The questionnaire stated that if the additional information was not returned by Feb 24th that our case would be closed.

The demands for information in the questionnaire shocked me, as someone who loves liberty and the first amendment.

I was asked to hand over our list of donors, including the amounts that they gave and the dates on which they gave them. 501c4 organizations do NOT have to disclose donor information. I knew that. Why didn’t they?

Among the demands that I found alarming and inappropriate were:
* The wanted us to identify our volunteers.
* They wanted to know if any of our donors or volunteers had run or would be running for office in the near future, (remember this was the 2012 election cycle). They wanted us to identify the office they would be running for.

*They wanted us to provide detailed contents of all speeches ever given, the names all of our speakers, and their credentials.

*They wanted copies of the written communications and contents of all other forms of communications to any legislative body, even those that represent us.

I was very uncomfortable with these questions and my husband and I discussed forfeiting our application. However, within days of reading through these questions we knew we were being targeted, because fellow TEA Party organizers across the nation were getting the same types of letters and questionnaires. It was then we decided to seek legal council.

On March 6th 2012, we retained the council of the American Center for Law and Justice to represent us in this matter.

2 weeks later, I received a letter from Lois Lerner, dated March 16th 2012, asking that I provide the previously requested information.

4 months later, we received a letter, dated July 9, 2012 stating that we had been approved to receive a tax exempt status. This was six hundred and thirty-five days after we applied.
In conclusion, the Wetumpka TEA Party filed a complete application. Our organization fell within the boundaries of receiving a 501c4 status. Yet, our application was singled out solely because we had “TEA Party” in our name. Government agents made invasive and excessive demands for information that they were not entitled to.

Congressman Camp and members of the committee, this was not an accident. This is a willful act of intimidation intended to discourage a point of view.

What the government did to our little group in Wetumpka, Alabama is un-American. This isn’t a matter of firing or arresting a few individuals.

The individuals who sought to intimidate us were acting as they thought they should, in a government culture that has little respect for its citizens.

Many of the agents and agencies of the federal government do not understand that they are servants of the people. They think they are our masters. And they are mistaken.

I’m not interested in scoring political points. I want to protect and preserve the America I grew up in, the America that people cross oceans and risk their lives to become a part of. And I’m terrified that it’s slipping away.





headline: Obama administration is in a crisis with no answers
byline: By Douglas E. Schoen


It seems that President Obama just can’t catch a break. He has most certainly had a difficult start to his second term. The debt ceiling and sequestration battle with House Republicans, attempts to broker a peace deal in Syria and the destruction of his gun control legislation have indeed been major setbacks.

But while these issues have been blows to the administration, they were at least somewhat beyond his control. The latest rash of scandals is very much homegrown in the Obama administration and they could, therefore, have been prevented. 

We have all watched as one scandal after another has come to light. The administration has been overreaching in all areas: with the IRS, with journalists at the AP and James Rosen at Fox News and now it appears that their most egregious overreaching has been with the American citizenry.

President Obama should be doing all he can to reach across the aisle and to quell American’s fears that he is not the man he said he was, he is just plodding along business as usual.

We heard from Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid that we should all just calm down about the NSA’s request for Verizon to hand over all records of telephone calls within its system – both within the U.S. and between the U.S. and other countries. Apparently the fact that this isn’t a new practice means that it shouldn’t bother us.

Reid’s feelings on the matter are certainly shared by other members of Congress like Senator Saxby Chambliss. But there are other influential members of Congress who see things the way the American public does. Republican Congressman Jim Sensenbrenner expressed his concern about the data collection.

He wrote in a letter to Attorney General Eric Holder, “as the author of the Patriot Act, I am extremely disturbed by what appears to be an overboard interpretation of the Act.” In a press release he continued, “seizing phone records of millions of innocent people is excessive and un-American.”

Leaked documents reveal that the NSA did not stop with the Verizon phone records.

They have been directly tapping the servers of nine leading US Internet companies, extracting video and audio chats, photographs, emails, documents, and connection logs that enable analysts to track foreign targets.

These Bush-era practices have been vehemently defended and their exposure criticized for the impact on our national security. For instance, Director of National Intelligence, James Clapper, condemned the leaks of the classified documents.

Indeed, this disclosure does have the potential to reveal too much to our enemies about our practices, but it more importantly calls into question the practices of our own administration. And it has now become clear that those practices are not in step with promises the President made to Americans.

Just a few months ago, President Obama declared “this is the most transparent administration in history” during a Google Plus “Fireside” hangout. To be sure, transparency was one of the President’s biggest campaign promises and a featured element of his first four years in office.

But these recent scandals call into question the authenticity of Obama’s statement.

From Benghazi to the IRS to the latest news on the NSA it is quite clear that Obama’s administration is failing to keep their word on this issue.

The result has been that Obama’s agenda is essentially dead in the water. His days, and his administration’s days, are now spent playing defense – in press conferences, in hearings and elsewhere.

What’s more, the appointments of Ambassador Susan Rice as his new national security advisor and Samantha Power to replace Susan Rice as UN Ambassador indicate that the administration is doubling down, not reaching out.

At a time when the president should be doing all he can to reach across the aisle and to quell American’s fears that he is not the man he said he was, he is just plodding along business as usual.

We don’t have time for business as usual anymore. There is far too much going on at home and abroad for the president to continue to ignore the crises his administration is facing. The time to act is now.





headline: From a Baby Boomer to Millennials -- an apology and some advice
byline: By Patrick Dorinson


Editor's note: Watch Patrick Dorinson on "Stossel" on Fox Business Network, Thursday, May 9 at 9 p.m. ET where he'll tackle the topic “What Ever Happened to GRIT?”

Dear Millennial Generation,

There is an old saying that says “make apologies not excuses.” And if anyone deserves an apology, not excuses it is your generation.

An apology from whom you might ask? From the Baby Boomers that’s who.

Let me explain.

I am a 60 year-old Boomer who, while looking around for someone to blame for many of our nation’s problems forgot the most obvious place to look, the mirror.

As you get older you will find out that self-examination is one of the hardest things to do so forgive me for having put it off so long.

As you get older you will find out that self-examination is one of the hardest things to do so forgive me for having put it off so long.

You have been unfairly labeled as the entitlement generation by your elders, in particular the Baby Boomers, who seem to have forgotten that they were once labeled the entitled generation.

So where did this sense of entitlement come from?

Outside of British royalty or the offspring of Hollywood celebrities no one is born with a feeling of entitlement. It is modeled behavior not a genetic trait.

And who modeled this behavior? Look no further than the Baby Boomer generation of your parents.

Folks say you are spoiled and can’t fend for yourselves without your iPhones, GPS, Facebook and Twitter.

I myself have been guilty of this lazy one-dimensional analysis. I was wrong on that count and I humbly apologize.

In fact, let me be the first ever Baby Boomer to apologize for the mess we are leaving you. It will probably cause many of my friends to get mad at me and deny the obvious but deep down I think they will agree.

I apologize we have left you debts both personal and public that will take your whole life to repay if even then.

I apologize that you were taught self-esteem and shielded from the consequences of the real world instead of teaching you self-reliance so you could find your own way in it.

I apologize that our “free love” sexual revolution of the 60s ended up with the too-early sexualization of your youth, robbing you of the innocence of childhood.

I apologize to those among you who were less fortunate that we condemned you to the worst public schools and created a welfare system that has trapped you in a never-ending cycle of poverty. We gave you fish to eat rather than teaching you how to fish so you could feed yourself.

We did you no favors.

I apologize that Boomer politicians did nothing to prepare for the most predictable event in world history-their eventual retirement and the huge costs that you will be forced to pay to keep us seniors happy. 

And don’t let any Boomer tell you they have nothing to apologize for.

While we were building our lives, we elected politicians of our generation of both parties who promised us goodies and then went about expanding government beyond its constitutional limits using borrowed money. And as individuals, just like the government, many ran up debts they couldn’t pay.

But with this apology, I feel compelled to offer you the benefit of the wisdom that comes from experience. As you will find out the best wisdom comes from the worst experiences.

So here goes.

1. “A Government that robs Peter to pay Paul can always count on the support of Paul” -- George Bernard Shaw

In 2012 the Obama campaign told you the fairy tale entitled “Life of Julia” where a young woman lives happily ever after from one government program to another throughout her life. But they don’t tell you who will pay for all this largesse.

Here’s a hint. It won’t be us Baby Boomers. It will be you with ever higher and higher taxes.

Big government by its very nature takes away your freedom under the guise of giving some benefit or security. As Ben Franklin, one of those old white guys called the Founding Fathers said, “He who trades security for freedom will have neither.”

2. “Democracy should be more than two wolves settin’ down with a sheep to discuss what to have for dinner” -- James Bovard

Generally political parties and pajamas are a waste of time. With the advances in technology you’ve made, and will make, in 20 years there may be no political parties.

We can only hope.

I say declare your independence and don’t join political parties. You don’t need them to be heard. Make them earn your trust before you give them your vote. Besides it will mess with the party leader’s heads and drive the pollster’s nuts.

3. “Question authority” -- Bumper sticker from the early 1970s

Try this one on your Baby Boomer professors as they try to indoctrinate you into being good little progressive worker bees before they send you off to work in the government hive. And remember indoctrination is not education.

4. “There is no free lunch” -- Milton Friedman

Any grand bargain by the geniuses in Washington will bargain away your financial and the nation’s fiscal future. And there ain’t a thing you can do about it.

Boomers marched on Washington to stop the Vietnam War. You should do the same and demand to see the nation’s books.

If you are going to be asked to pay the bills you should see exactly what you are paying for. And don’t let them try to buy you off with some “free” stuff. Today’s free lunch is tomorrow’s unpaid bill.

5. “There is no native criminal class except Congress” -- Mark Twain

Before voting for a member of Congress, ask yourself why would someone raise and spend millions to keep a job that only pays $175,000 a year. Then look and see how many Washington lobbyists hanging out on K Street are former Congressmen. Get a free education from the taxpayer for a few years in Congress and then cash-out. It’s nice work if you can get it.

6. “Government should stay the Hell out of people’s lives” -- Barry Goldwater

Tell the government to stay out of your lives. Democrats want to ban guns and plastic bags. Republicans want to ban abortion and gay marriage.

Tell them both stop being busybodies and mind their own cotton pickin’ business.

As long as you ain’t scaring the horses, it doesn’t harm others and it ain’t illegal enjoy your liberty.

But remember your liberty comes with responsibilities.

I hope I’ve given you a lot to think about and I hope you take some time to do so. Whether you are on the left or the right in a few years you will all be in the same boat-- paying for the spendthrift ways of your elders.

So the next time you hear Baby Boomers castigate your generation for being spoiled or entitled, just roll your eyes and shake your head while you remind them that a few short decades ago they were in your shoes being accused of the very same thing.

Oh, and tell them they better be nice to you because you will be the ones in power soon enough and in control of their Medicare and Social Security. -- That should get their attention!

Good luck and I’ll check back in a few years to see how you are doing





headline: The gun debate is a culture debate
byline: By Trevor Burrus


Nearly three months after the tragedy in Newtown, Connecticut, we are still debating the place of guns in American society. That debate is not just about statistics and laws—it is about culture.

In a recent appearance on PBS's "NewsHour," Vice President Joe Biden admitted an assault weapons ban would do little to stop crime, but argued the weapons should still be banned if they don’t have “real utility either in terms of any sporting or self protection needs[.]”

Here, Biden forgets a founding American principle: we permit the government to have guns, not the other way around. Citizens don’t need to justify owning an “assault weapon,” the government needs to justify taking it.

Gun disgust is also one of the primary reasons gun-control advocates promote laws that have little to no effect on reducing gun violence.

Biden should be applauded for his honesty, but this begs the question: If honest gun-control advocates know that laws they support are ineffective, why fight for them? Because the gun debate is fundamentally a cultural debate.

One cultural tradition believes government is a necessary evil, best kept small, contained, and subordinate to the people.

The other tradition views government as a force for good that can often do better with fewer restraints.

One tradition views private gun ownership as important for resisting tyranny; the other views guns as, at best, a necessary evil, and at worst, something we should discard to become a fully civilized society.

Gun-control advocates scoff at the suggestion that personal arms can stand up to tanks and drones. But the anti-tyranny argument is not so much based on efficacy as it is on power: who has it and why.

In America, the government derives its power from the people. But the cultural divide goes deeper than the role of government.

Some Americans teach their children that gun ownership is a right a responsibility, and that guns are tools to respect and enjoy. Others discipline five-year olds for fashioning pretend guns out of pipe cleaners; they view guns with something resembling disgust.

Productive conversations about guns can thus be difficult because the anti-gun movement gives little to no weight to the values of private gun ownership. That is because “gun disgust” engenders a bias against guns.

In 2001, the American Medical Association recommended that doctors ask patients about gun ownership during office visits. They did not recommend that doctors ask about swimming pools or bicycles, both of which are much more likely to result in accidental deaths than a gun. Yet gun-control advocates have no problem “allowing” private swimming pools and bikes because they understand how someone could enjoy biking and swimming.

Gun disgust is also one of the primary reasons gun-control advocates promote laws that have little to no effect on reducing gun violence. On many questions, the debate over the effects of gun-control laws on crime is surprisingly uncontroversial.

The National Academy of Sciences found that gun-control laws have had no measurable effect on gun violence rates. The study was not written by gun-rights advocates—in fact, all but one member of the committee were gun-control advocates. Programs ranging from gun buybacks, to the famous “assault weapons” ban, to “gun-free zones,” were all found to be ineffective at curbing gun crime.

Gun disgust certainly explains the persistence of “gun-free zones” as a proposed solution to tragedies like Sandy Hook. If guns are viewed as contaminants, then the suggestion that teachers should be allowed to carry weapons on school grounds is revolting.

What is truly revolting, however, is when mass-shooters ignore the polite request to leave their guns at the door and take advantage of a building full of defenseless victims.

When challenged on the effectiveness of their proposed laws, many gun-control advocates will say, “Well, it’s a start.” And here is where gun-rights supporters get understandably worried about what “a start” means. Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) recently said in response to a question about whether the assault weapons ban is “just the beginning”: “Oh absolutely. I mean, I’m against handguns.”

When it comes to guns, the much ballyhooed red state/blue state cultural divide is real. If we want to have a productive discussion on guns we must find a way to cross this cultural divide.





headline: 'Submission' is not a dirty word -- what Gabby Reece was trying to say
byline: By Suzanne Venker


Surrender. That’s the underlying message of Gabrielle Reece’s statements last week about marriage. The former volleyball star and current fitness expert—a woman who has literally made a living being strong—has dubbed submission a strength.

“I choose to serve my family and my husband,” says Reece, “because it creates a dynamic where he is then in fact acting more like a man and masculine and treating me the way I want to be treated.” NBC’s Brian Williams called it a “new and provocative take on how to keep a marriage together.”

But is it? "The Today Show’s" online survey asked the public on whether or not they agreed with Reece’s statement: “To be truly feminine means being soft and receptive and look out, here it comes, submissive …” The majority of its audience—a whopping 55%—agreed that embracing femininity and being submissive is the way to go. Only 19% disagreed.

For more than a decade, I’ve been trumpeting the sound of this silent majority. It’s one that believes marriage is about embracing human nature, rather than trying to make the sexes interchangeable in the name of “equality.” We don’t need a revolution to make men and women equal. They’re already equal.

Submission means to defer to another person’s judgment, opinion or decision. It means you trust your partner.

But they are very different. A woman’s femininity, for example, is very powerful. It doesn’t lower her status or preclude her from being an independent woman. Go! Do what you want with your life. No one’s stopping you. But when it comes to love, surrender. It’s OK to let your guard down. It’s OK to serve your man.

That’s what Gabby Reece meant when she used the word submissive. Admittedly, it’s a loaded term. But it doesn’t mean being less than, or subordinate to, one’s spouse. Submission means to defer to another person’s judgment, opinion or decision. It means you trust your partner. If that trust exists, submission is a no brainer.

And it goes both ways. “I’m just sort of surprised at the way people took the word ‘submissive.’ The idea of trying to make the lives of the people in your home, including your husband, better…that is a form of choice of service. I really believe in that idea that we should all make our lives, each other’s lives, better. And by the way, my husband lives by that same code.”

Funny, when we talk about husbands being submissive, or deferential, to their wives, no one raises an eyebrow.

Turn it around and women get heart palpitations.

They assume that deferring to a man means women aren’t strong or capable all on their own. That was the script their generation was sold, but it just isn’t true.

When I wrote The War on Men last November, urging women to get in touch with their feminine side, there was a strong backlash.

The most common response was, “What do you mean by the word feminine?” People assumed I think women should be doormats, or that they should ask “How high?” when their men ask them to jump. Nothing could be further from the truth.

What I meant is that the faux version of equality women have been taught undermines love. The tools women were taught to be successful in the marketplace are the same set of tools that will screw up their love lives.

I know women pride themselves on being in charge. And when channeled properly—at work, for example—the quality is a good one. But when it comes to love, it’s the kiss of death.

As Reece said, being married is a form of service. So get comfortable taking care of your husband. If he’s one of the good guys, I promise: he won’t swallow you whole.





headline: Upholding our Constitution is not a partisan issue, it's an American issue
byline: By Jason Stverak


About a year ago, Taymour Karim, 31-year-old doctor in Syria was abducted and tortured for his protest against the government in Damascus.

His captors beat him so hard that they knocked out two of his teeth and broke three of his ribs, yet he refused to give up the names of his friends.

Despite his efforts, his computer had already told the men beating him everything they wanted to know.

“They knew everything about me,” he told Bloomberg. “The people I talked to, the plans, the dates, the stories of other people, every movement, every word I said through Skype. They even knew the password of my Skype account... my computer was arrested before me.”

We need to start viewing an attack by the government on one set of Americans as an attack on all Americans.

To many Americans, Karim’s tragedy seems like an awful story of abuse in far off country, but this week, we learned that the United States government isn’t much different.

The NSA now has access to records of every call made on Verizon cell phones in America, and is separately authorized by the Patriot Act to conduct wiretaps.

We recently learned that the NSA is pulling our personal information, photos, and emails from the servers of popular websites like Google, Facebook, and YouTube, and that they’re tracking our credit card purchases as well.

While we don’t yet know what the Obama administration plans to do with the details of who we’re calling, how long we’re speaking to them, and where we’re calling from, that’s beside the point.

The real issue at stake is the growing chasm between the powers we granted to government in our Constitution, and the powers government has seized.

Civil liberties were at the core of the American founding, and the recognition of these liberties in our Constitution and Bill of Rights is supposed to separate us from the totalitarian dictatorships of the world. But these liberties are quickly eroding, and all Americans, regardless of their political leanings, should be deeply concerned about the gross abuses of power we’ve seen from the Obama administration in recent weeks.

Even politicians as different in their views as Vice President Al Gore and U.S. Senator Ted Cruz agree: the government has infringed too far on our personal lives and liberties, and it’s time to take a stand.

A thousand paper cuts can be as deadly as a single gunshot, and our civil liberties are bleeding out from the sheer volume of direct attacks by the Obama administration. Whether it’s the IRS auditing grandmothers who have worked with the Tea Party, or the EPA targeting conservative groups, or the Justice Department harassing reporters, or even HHS extorting funds from health insurance providers, every day we learn about a different department violating our rights.

What’s scariest of all is that these each of these scandals continued for months or even years before they came to light.

It’s fair to wonder exactly how many other federal agencies are abusing power, targeting the administration’s foes, and invading our privacy under the cover of darkness. In fact, at this point, all areas of government deserve a healthy degree of suspicion.

In the era of the paternalistic surveillance state--where government gives itself permission to invade your privacy because it think it knows what is “best” for you--blind indifference is possibly the most dangerous threat to our freedoms.

Conservatives were roundly mocked for suggesting that ObamaCare authorized death panels, but after HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius spoke to Congress about choosing “when someone lives and someone dies,” it’s entirely reasonable to question whether placing so much power in a bureaucrat’s hands is such a wise idea.

We need to start viewing an attack by the government on one set of Americans as an attack on all Americans. When the IRS audits Tea Party organizations, or judges authorize the NSA to spy on all Verizon customers, we are all victims. The government could just as easily have chosen one of us to harass.

And with no end in sight to the rise of the powerful federal agencies, particularly with ObamaCare giving the bureaucracy even further control over health care decisions, there’s no reason to believe government will decide on its own to start upholding our civil liberties.

Upholding the Constitution is not a partisan issue, but rather an American issue, and if we don’t start standing up for our rights, there’s going to be no one left when the surveillance state comes for us.





headline: The bittersweet day I got a hit off dad's best fastball
byline: By Billy Coffey


Twenty-eight years ago:

I am a thin and gangly boy of twelve, sweating in the July sun. I tap the barrel of my baseball bat on the trashcan lid that serves as home plate and stare out past the garden, to the tall maples beyond. My father stands sixty feet, six inches in front of me. His right foot rests on an old brick to mark the spot.

He spits and smiles and asks if I’m ready.

We’ve been in the backyard for an hour, working on my swing. Head down, he says. Weight back. Elbow up. See the ball. The tennis balls come straight and at half-speed. I’ve sent a dozen over the maples, more into the sprouting corn and potatoes. Twice, I’ve swung late and peppered the neighbor’s shed.

Every boy grows up. Every dad does, too.

But now supper’s ready and it’s time for the last pitch. Dad always saves up for that one, lets it fly as hard as he can manage. Smoke, he calls it. I don’t call it that. It’s too hard and too fast to be smoke. It hisses like a live thing.

Still, I say I’m ready.

He winds. A blur rockets from his hand. I close my eyes and wince, waiting for the whoosh of my bat meeting nothing but air. What comes instead is a soft plink!

I open my eyes to see the tennis ball flying in a high blue sky. It lands not fifty feet away and bounces twice on the thick grass, stopping just to my father’s left.

I raise my hands and whoop, overcome with a joy that forces an impromptu victory lap in the rough shape of a diamond—the pear tree for first base, the clothesline pole for second, and garage window for third—jumping because I did it, truly and finally did it. I hit the hardest, fastest pitch my dad could throw. I hit the smoke.

I land on the trashcan lid and look out at my father. He’s staring at the ball near his feet. Half of his face is frozen in what looks like pride. The other half holds a look I don’t understand but can feel, even at twelve. And suddenly I don’t feel like celebrating anymore. I feel instead a kind of shame.

Two weeks ago:

I am a grown and graying man of forty, sweating in the April sun. My son stands away from me and taps his bat on the Frisbee he calls home plate. We’ve been in the backyard for an hour, head down/weight back/elbow up/see the ball. He’s sent a dozen tennis balls out over the creek, more onto the roof of our house. Twice, he’s swung late and peppered the neighbor’s shed.

But now it’s time for the last pitch. Smoke, I call it—fast and hard, like a blur.

He’s never hit a last pitch, can’t even get the bat off his shoulder. But he says he’s ready and I wind and that blur rockets from my hand, and I don’t hear the whoosh of his bat. I hear a plink!

We look up to see the ball flying into the blue sky. It lands in the thick grass over behind me. I hear my son whooping, overcome with joy. He runs not in a diamond but in a fat circle. Part of me sees this and is proud. The other part sees that yellow ball lying in the green grass and knows that was my best, that was as hard as I could throw. That was my smoke. And by the time my son finishes his lap, I think he knows it, too. He’s still happy, oh yes. But there’s also a look in his eyes that doesn’t seem like happiness at all.

I tuck him in bed that night. Just before I leave his room, he calls me back to his bed.

“I’m sorry I hit your pitch,” he says.

I tell him there’s no need to be sorry, that he should be proud. I don’t know if he agrees. I understand. I was once him.

I’ve never asked dad how he felt that day twenty-eight years ago. Now I know. It’s a kind of pain you’re proud to feel, like showing off a nasty bruise. It’s a rite of passage we all must endure.

Every boy grows up. Every dad does, too. My son and I grew up together that evening two weeks ago. That was the moment we both realized that in some ways, I was becoming less and he was becoming more.





headline: Why many athletes don't speak out when a coach is abusive
byline: By Lisa Herbertson


In April, the country was transfixed by video images of a head basketball coach, at one of the most prestigious universities in the United States, repeatedly berating and shoving his players in a manner reminiscent of former Hoosiers basketball coach Bobby Knight. They saw one small coach in a sea of giant young men fearlessly flying around the court in a rage, presumably in an attempt to motivate them to play better basketball.

It came as no surprise that as soon as the video was made public, the Rutgers coach was fired, and days later the university’s Athletic Director followed suit, resigning in disgrace after admitting he had been made aware of the coach’s abuse.

Rutger's University parents face-palmed themselves in shock -- “how could we not know that this was happening?” and “why wasn’t something done when it was made known?”

Well, I can tell them the how and the why.

It probably would puzzle most people as to why athletes don’t speak out when they are being verbally or physically humiliated by their coaches.

I was a teenager, away from home, being subjected to daily emotional torment by a grown man in authority over me.

As an athlete you try to keep your head down and work hard. And, despite the fact that most of us are used to working through some form of physical pain associated with our sport, we didn’t sign up to be abused, let alone are we taught how to handle it on any level by a superior.

I was a collegiate softball player at the number one ranked school in the NAIA, and no one would argue that the university’s head coach was an amazing softball technician. 

He recruited me right out of high school and at the age of 18, I joined the ranks of the elite.I felt humbled, honored and very grateful for the generous scholarship I was awarded. 

When it came to my sport I was obedient to a fault: "Yes, coach...no, coach...whatever you say, coach." 

Unfortunately, that fealty led me down a path filled with repeated injury and multiple surgeries.

The psychological and physical recovery of an injured athlete is dependent on many factors, not the least being the attitude of the coach. 

In my case, the loss of a highly recruited and well-compensated pitcher exposed a very ugly side of collegiate athletics that has now, thanks to the Rutgers story, become front and center.

Sitting on the bench at practice I was subject to daily verbal diatribes in front of my teammates. I was a “waste to the program” and told by the coach that he “owned me" and the girls I played with. That we couldn’t complain because he would yank our scholarship funds. 

He told the players to not speak with me in the hopes I would quit so he could take my scholarship money and give it to a “healthy pitcher.” 

I was a teenager, away from home, being subjected to daily emotional torment by a grown man in authority over me.

To the credit of my teammates they qualified for Nationals and we all flew back to the Midwest. 

Upon returning without the title the following week, Coach told me I should have been “begging to go so I could wash his dirty underwear.”In fact, I was inevitably blamed for the loss of their rankings that year because I wasn’t on the mound -- something about “not being mentally tough enough to handle an injury.”

I spent an excruciating two years playing softball in a program that was filled with similar stories. Complaining to the Athletic Director was for naught because this was a winning coach who was bringing top notch talent to the school. In other words, shut up or quit.

Finally, when things reached their nexus, I opened up to my parents.They quickly stepped in and encouraged me to leave the team, telling me that no amount of scholarship money was worth the kind of maltreatment that was being heaped on me.

In a moment I will always remember, my father told me that no boyfriend, no husband, no employer, and certainly no coach could speak to me that way. It was a life lesson, for sure.

I went on to win a walk-on spot on the girl’s basketball team my junior year which led to another scholarship and a starting position as a senior.

My confidence was restored through the encouragement and support of my basketball coach but to this day, as I coach my own softball girls, I am often reminded how of how impact the relationship between a coach and player can carry.

My experiences, and that of the Rutgers University players, should serve as a cautionary tale to all parents, athletes and coaches that speaking up against abuse shouldn’t be sacrificed at the alter of the mighty scholarship dollar.





headline: Making the GOP relevant -- to win elections the elephant needs more than a makeover
byline: By Chip Espinoza


Real relevance isn’t hanging with Jay-Z or playing the sax on the "Tonight Show." That’s all pretty cool, but it’s not ultimately significant to making America a better place.

It has been said that the Republicans are out of touch, but perhaps they are just out of tune. However, if I were a Millennial (someone approximately between ages 12 and 30) listening to the presidential debates last fall, I would think both the elephant and the donkey are on a different wavelength from me.

I am not sure I heard a substantive reference to challenges today’s young people face--for example, unemployment and school debt. That’s mystifying, when you consider their age cohort will be the largest voting bloc in the next presidential election.

Two of the biggest challenges Millennials encounter is not being taken seriously and not being listened to.

A recent study by Georgetown’s Berkley Center for Religion, Politics and World Affairs finds that 33 percent of college-age Millennials identify as Democrats and 23 percentas Republicans. That 10-point deficit is bad news for the GOP, perhaps, but if we do the math (33 + 23) on the Millennials we see that the remaining, 44 percent, are undecided. Don’t confuse the term undecided with indecisive. Here's why:

The Georgetown study also reported that, compared to previous generations at the same age, Millennials are more likely to un-affiliate with the religion of their childhood.

If you read business news, you will discover that Millennials don’t mind un-affiliating with companies either.

So we can see it coming: the same Millennials certainly won’t have a problem un-affiliating with a political party.

That is good news for Republicans who fear the first wave of Millennials is already lost. But they should not lose heart, indeed, there’s even some evidence that Millennials are already cooling on Barack Obama.

In 2008, Millennials broke in favor of President Obama by 34 percentage points, but in 2012, he won them a smaller margin, 23 points. So yes, as we look ahead, we can see a huge bloc of voters, both affiliated and un-affiliated, looking for a political party that is in tune with them.

Here are five variablesthat will make the elephant relevant to Millennials:

1. Emphasize how out-of-control spending today equates to less opportunity for them tomorrow.

The number one thing Millennials want is to have opportunity. As conservative Millennial pundit and author Margaret Hoover observed recently, “Millennials are concerned with national debt and the deficits. The message that previous administrations' reckless spending—Republicans and Democrats alike—has amounted to ‘generational theft’ that is compromising the Millennial generation's fiscal future can resonate.”

At the same time, Republicans must be balanced in their approach: Millennials alsobelieve that entitlement programs cancreate opportunity and dignity, especially for the elderly, and thus are healthy for the country.

2. Tune into their voice

Not only are Millennial issues not being considered, they are not even in the conversation. Two of the biggest challenges Millennials encounter is not being taken seriously and not being listened to. Engage them. Give them a seat at the table.

3. Think collaboration and drop the “Father Knows Best” stuff.

Millennials are turned off by when a person, party, or religion claims to be right 100 percent of the time. If they had their own party, I think they would call it “Third Way.”

Millennials are natural collaborators and problem-solvers. They think there is always a third way to look at things.

They have grown up suspicious of people who think they are right about everything. For that reason, Vice President Biden didn’t help his boss with the youth vote in last fall’s vice-presidential debate. Not only was his performance condescending, it was creepy. So GOPers should watch that video for pointers on how not to act.

4. Understand that gay marriage is not a threat to national interests

According to the Pew Research Center, Millennials are the first generation in which the majority approves of gay marriage. If there is no room in the party for gay fathers, mothers, friends, aunts, and uncles who want to marry, then there is no room in that party for Millennials. It is personal to them, regardless of their own sexual preference.

5. Appreciate that Millennials value interdependence

Another name for Millennials is "Globals" (perhaps a more accurate label). As a generation, they have more in common with people their age from the rest of the world than previous generations. They value interdependence over independence when it comes to relating to both the earth and its citizens.

New faces running as Republicans in 2013 and 2014 will not be enough. Instead, Republicans need to get in tune. And that could lead to a winning jam session, in which the elephant is once again in tune.





headline: The pursuit of liberty is a marathon
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Nothing will be quite the same in Boston or in America after Monday's terrorist attack. Psychologically, the bombings bring terrorism to the streets of an American city, on a sunny Patriot's Day, during a road race, the Boston Marathon.

The bombings mean that any street corner, in any American City, is vulnerable -- that terror need not come from the sky, nor target iconic skyscrapers and national landmarks. It can target people where they gather just for fun, on any given day.

The attacker or attackers today used bombs in backpacks, not commandeered jets. They chose the streets of Boston, not the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., or the World Trade Center in New York City as their target. Because the target of those who hate freedom is anyone who loves it, anywhere, anytime.

Here is the irony:  We are vulnerable, because we are free and strong.

On Monday, Boston and America joined cities like Jerusalem and nations like Ireland, which have long known that safety is relative, that the danger that comes from asserting the values we hold dear is omnipresent, that life itself is a gift that can be taken not only by cancer and heart disease, but by the disease of terrorism.

We are no more vulnerable today than yesterday, but we will feel more vulnerable, because we had no known hint of what was to befall us. 

This event will register, psychologically, in the minds of those at the Boston Garden and Madison Square Garden and at parades on Fifth Avenue in a way that only the carnage on 9/11 did -- and, possibly, even more. 

With all our TSA security, with the Homeland Security Act, with the government nosing around in our emails and deploying drones at home and abroad, with the (nonsensical) talk in Washington about banning assault rifles or restricting access to ammunition, an 8-year-old boy was blown up Monday, two adults were blown up on Monday, and more than a hundred others were injured, some losing limbs.

Here is the irony: We are vulnerable, because we are free and strong. These qualities attract the ire of those who would have us shackled and weak, who are consumed by hatred for individual possibilities, rather than love for what a free person can dream about and strive for and accomplish.

Please tell your children this: We are attacked in America because we speak about and believe in the power of people to guide themselves through life, to make their own decisions, to think their own thoughts, to speak freely and to pursue their own happiness.

Tell them that as long as the Lincoln Memorial and the Jefferson Memorial and the Statue of Liberty grace our great land that those opposed to equality and freedom will always see us as enemies. Tell them that we must always be vigilant, but never afraid.

Tell them that we cannot be defeated, because the truth wins, every time. And we, in America, hold great truths to be self-evident.

Tell them that liberty is a marathon.





headline: Obama’s ‘war on journalism’ just a skirmish, argues Reuters media critic
byline: By Dan Gainor


It must be nice being a Democratic president. No matter what you do – even investigate the press – there’s always someone in the media willing to defend it. The latest defense comes from Reuters media columnist Jack Shafer.

Shafer wrote a May 24 piece raising the question: “What war on the press?” His strange summary point was that “all this legal battering of the press, while real, hardly rises to the level of war.” Perhaps he wouldn’t consider it a war unless Obama started treating journalists like some third-world dictator.

The longtime media critic began with three massive paragraphs and nearly 400 words detailing how everybody from the lefties at The New York Times, Washington Post and Slate to libertarians at Reason or the Post’s quasi-conservative Jennifer Rubin all agreed “President Barack Obama has declared war on the press.”

Shafer has undercut arguments against Obama and his administration's treatment of the press at every step of the way.

Everybody but Shafer, that is.

Shafer’s 1,400-word half-hearted defense focused on “language in the affidavit for search warrant for Fox News reporter James Rosen’s emails,” because the document called it a “criminal offense.”

The column then relied on an explanation from a George Washington University Law School professor who said that expression was “not a prelude to a prosecution.” So you can call journalism “criminal,” as long as you don’t prosecute today.

The rest of the piece agreed with journalists on most every point – but with finesse of a curveball pitcher nibbling at the corners.

Shafer was never willing to completely admit things are as bad as the 10 separate news organizations he mentions claim. His nuances were reminiscent of Bill Clinton’s classic “It depends on what the meaning of the word ‘is’ is.”

Shafer went on to admit that “there has been” a leak crackdown, but claimed it was mostly among bureaucrats and not journalists. He even noted that his colleagues compare the “tightlipped” administration to an information “black hole.”

But at every step along the way, Shafer undercut the arguments against Obama. He whined that the press also lobbies “just like any other interest group whose privilege is threatened by government laws, policies and prosecutions.” And naturally, he used the traditional liberal defense – blame Republicans, because they too have “cheered on leak-chasers.”

While that’s a traditional liberal defense, Shafer has proclaimed that he isn’t exactly liberal.

He worked at the libertarian magazine Inquiry until 1984, according to an adoring profile by The American Journalism Review. And, in a 2000 election piece for Slate, he declared support for the Libertarian Party platform. “I agree with the Libertarian Party platform: much smaller government, much lower taxes, an end to income redistribution, repeal of the drug laws, fewer gun laws, a dismantled welfare state, an end to corporate subsidies, First Amendment absolutism, a scaled-back warfare state,” he wrote.

But his career and actions speak louder than those words. He spent more than a decade as editor of the left-wing alternative weekly, The Washington City Paper. And moved on from there to work at the lefty Slate until 2011.

He spent a lot of that time and who knows how many column inches bashing Fox and its owner Rupert Murdoch. (Writer’s Note: Murdoch also owns this website, in case you didn’t know.)

On Shafer’s own personal site, he has a prominent link to a “Hot Topic” called “Everything Murdoch.” That page includes 51 columns involving Fox or Murdoch and that’s just from 2007 to 2011. One post has the headline: “The wrong and the right reasons for hating the media mogul.” That’s a small flavor of his obsession.

It’s not like he stopped when he was laid off at Slate, either.

A May 21 Reuters column criticized Fox reporter Rosen repeatedly “because he practiced poor journalistic tradecraft.” While Shafer defended the concept of Rosen’s reporting, his column was one long attack on it. “Even teenagers practice better tradecraft than this when deceiving parents,” he argued.

That column started off with eight journalists and pundits criticizing the administration’s intrusion into the press. Every one of those names was in addition to the 10 he cited in his main administration defense three days later. But Shafer claimed these eight were just “grousing,” so it must not be that bad.

Shafer’s columns appear with the tagline: “Jack Shafer is a Reuters columnist but his opinions are his own.” Thankfully, among the media, that is pretty close to true. Shafer’s oddball defense of Obama needs to stay that way – an army of one.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: We won in Iraq -- a veteran's take on the war
byline: By Leif Babin


The long war in Iraq—known to the U.S. military as Operation Iraqi Freedom—has been labeled many things from a war of liberation to an illegal occupation to the worst American military blunder since Vietnam. But for those who served on the battlefields of Iraq, who fought the enemy and sacrificed much sweat, blood and tears, we call it something else: Victory.

Much of the American public doesn’t know what to make of the Iraq War. This is fueled in part by misconceptions in the news media, inaccurate portrayals in television and movies, and a lack of coverage of the latter years of the war once violence levels plummeted. There never was widespread acknowledgement of the evils of the Iraqi insurgents toward their own people. In addition, the extraordinary security gains that were achieved at tremendous cost and personal sacrifice by American military forces were never displayed. In spite of this, from my perspective through three combat deployments to Iraq, it is absolutely crystal clear: We won.

I am proud to have served in Iraq, to have answered the nation’s call, to served alongside some of the finest warriors imaginable in a desperate fight that made a difference.

For those of us who fought on the “front lines” in Iraq, we witnessed in technicolor the horrific evils of our insurgent foes—as evil as any the U.S. military has ever faced. They ruled over the civilian populous through murder, torture, rape, fear and intimidation. The war for us was never about establishing democracy in Iraq or building a strong centralized government. It was about fighting and destroying our nation’s enemies. It was about keeping the flashpoint of the worldwide Islamic jihadist movement against America and our allies on foreign soil -- and away from our homeland. It was about defeating the insurgency; freeing the Iraqi people to live more secure and peaceful lives; protecting our brothers in arms and bringing as many of them home as we could; but most importantly, about doing our utmost to win and leave Iraq in some semblance of order. And win we did.

Consider the example of Ar Ramadi, Iraq—where Sunni Sheiks sided with U.S. military forces in the “Anbar Awakening” and played a central role in this victory. Some pundits and politicians maintain that this phenomenon magically happened of its own accord. In reality, it was directly enabled by U.S. combat troops as the result of an orchestrated effort by a bold U.S. Army Colonel and his commanders on the ground to retake the city one neighborhood at a time.

I deployed to Ar Ramadi as a SEAL platoon commander in April 2006 and led many operations in support of those efforts. At that time, Ramadi was a total war zone and the deadly epicenter of the Iraqi insurgency. U.S. forces there could not penetrate into many areas without sustaining significant casualties. Rubble pile buildings, roads marred with IED craters and twisted metal hulks of burned out vehicles were everywhere. The string of U.S. Marine fortifications along the main route received constant attacks from dozens of enemy fighters, with automatic weapons fire, RPG-7s, mortars and suicide truck bombs. Every day, brave U.S. Soldiers and Marines were bloodied. The Camp Ramadi medical facility was a near constant flow of mangled, dead or dying. A U.S. Marine intelligence report leaked to the press grimly labeled Ramadi and Al Anbar Province “all but lost.” Virtually no one believed it possible to turn around the security situation. And many in Washington were clamoring for U.S. withdrawal.

Yet under the leadership of U.S. Army Colonel Sean MacFarland, and through the extraordinary heroism of the American Soldiers and Marines of the “Ready First” Brigade Combat Team of the 1st Armored Division, the impossible task was undertaken. The plan called “seize, clear, hold, build” was implemented throughout the summer and fall of 2006. U.S. troops seized key terrain, established permanent outposts in enemy held areas, beat back the insurgency, forced them out of their deepest safe havens and broke their stranglehold on the local populous. As a result, the people of Ramadi and Anbar Province switched sides, joined with the U.S. and Iraqi Security Forces and rose up against the insurgency. These successes were not without extraordinary sacrifices. In the six months that my SEAL unit spent with the Ready First Brigade in Ramadi, 58 U.S. Servicemen and women were killed in action including two of our SEALs, Marc Lee and Mike Monsoor, and a third, Ryan Job, later died from surgical complications to repair his combat wounds. Over 300 U.S. forces were wounded. But the sacrifices were not in vain.

In September 2009, I once again deployed to Ar Ramadi, Iraq. This time, the warzone of 2006 was almost unrecognizable. Many of the rubble pile buildings were rebuilt, markets and cafes were open, hospitals and schools were fully functioning and operational. Iraqi Police checkpoints were located throughout the city. Peace and security had broken out everywhere. Though a modicum of violence still existed, it paled in comparison to what had been. To put this in perspective, throughout my six-month deployment there in 2009-2010, only a single U.S. Soldier was killed in a non-combat fatality in all of Al Anbar Province. The turnaround was staggering.

For me, and for those I was honored to serve with, it was a testament to the victory that had been achieved. It is a victory that looks vastly different than some might have envisioned. But it is victory nonetheless. I am proud to have served in Iraq, to have answered the nation’s call, to have served alongside some of the finest warriors imaginable in a desperate fight that made a difference. What this victory means in the long run only history will judge. For now, our war in Iraq is over. And we won. 





headline: Memorial Day poppies and the woman who launched a movement
byline: By Cathy Maxwell


Every Memorial Day, when I run into the grocery store to pick up those last minute items for the three day weekend’s picnic, I’m met with members of the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) selling their poppies.

We cherish, too, the poppy red/ that grows on fields where valor led;
It seems to signal to the skies/that blood of heroes never dies

-- “We Shall Keep the Faith” by Moina Michael

I remember as a kid that it was very common to see paper poppies being sold around Memorial Day. You could even go to the post office and purchase one for a donation. 

They were fun things to buy and twist around a purse strap or a button but I didn’t know what they meant until I came across the poem by Moina Michael that launched the movement.

This Memorial Day, if you are offered a poppy, wear it proudly.  And when you see it on someone else, know you are in the presence of a grateful citizen.

An educator and humanitarian, Moina Michael was a part of the generation that lived through World War I. The casualties of this war were spectacular. Eight million soldiers died. Twenty-one million were wounded. This was warfare on a scale we had never known before.

Like many of her time, Michael was touched by Colonel John McCrae’s poem “In Flanders Fields” that described the poppies growing between the grave markers of those who had fought valiantly. 

She was inspired to write her own poem “We Shall Keep the Faith” and took to wearing a memorial poppy so that she would never forget those who had made the ultimate sacrifice. 

However, she took her tribute a step farther.

In 1918, at the University of Georgia, she taught a class of disabled veterans and realized how much financial support these men would need in their lives. 

Having worked with the YWCA, she decided to create a fundraiser. Michael and her friends began making paper poppies patterned after the one she wore and selling them for donations. 

The idea of honoring disabled veterans in this manner caught on. By the time of Michael’s death in 1944, over $2 million had been raised for veterans’ programs and the purpose and spirit behind her campaign continues to this day.

The poppies are now made by disabled veterans in VA Hospitals. They are the only people who are paid for their work with this program. 

Members of the VFW and American Legion Auxiliary distribute the paper flowers around Memorial Day and Veteran’s Day, both days of remembrance. 

All contributions go to help veterans, their orphans and their widows. The United States is not the only one to support the poppy program. Poppies can be found throughout the United Kingdom as well.

So this Memorial Day, if you are offered a poppy, wear it proudly. And when you see it on someone else, know you are in the presence of a grateful citizen.

“And now the Torch and Poppy Red -- we wear in honor of our dead.
Fear not that ye have died for naught; We'll teach the lesson that ye wrought in Flanders Fields.”
-- “We Shall Keep the Faith” by Moina Michael





headline: Samantha Power's promotion to UN ambassador is a major disappointment
byline: By Richard Grenell


The woman charged with the protection of global human rights for the White House for the last four years was promoted Tuesday to represent the United States at the United Nations. 

Despite leading an embarrassing policy of inaction -- during which 80,000 plus Syrians were killed by violence created by their own government, thousands of Sudanese were ethnically-cleansed in Darfur, and hundreds of thousands were murdered and displaced in the Congo -- President Obama announced Tuesday that he has selected Samantha Power, an academic and 2008 Obama presidential campaign aide, as his next nominee to represent the United States as ambassador to the United Nations. 

Power, a former Harvard professor known for lecturing U.S. government officials to do more to stop international violence, ran the White House’s Office of Multilateral Affairs and Human Rights until March of 2013. She was also appointed in April 2012 by the president to chair a newly-formed Atrocities Prevention Board. Power’s book “A Problem from Hell, America and the Age of Genocide” even won a Pulitzer Prize. 

Once Power finally achieved a position of actual authority, she continuously failed to act or even forcefully speak out in favor of U.S. government action.  

Power has spent most of her career advocating for increased U.S. government involvement to stop rights abuses around the world. 

Her appointment to run the White House office for human rights was loudly trumpeted as a coup for the NGO community: The woman whose career skyrocketed by lecturing President Bush on his inaction in Sudan was now in charge of the U.S. government’s response to future crises. 

However, it didn’t take long before Power’s decades of big talk was put to the test. 

In a position of power and proximity to the president of the United States, from which she could meaningfully act against any unfolding injustice, Power was largely silent and completely ineffective. 

The NGO community was left wondering which Samantha Power was getting to speak inside the Oval Office.

Prior to entering government, Power was a loud supporter of the international concept “Responsibility to Protect (R2P)”, a U.N. supported term that pressures those in power to protect the vulnerable during war, crisis and poor governing. 

In fact, it’s not an over-statement to say her career was built on the idea that the government should act more and talk less. 

But from inside government while sitting comfortably ensconced at the White House’s National Security Council, she was one of the most disappointing leaders to the R2P activists.

Before entering government, Power consistently espoused her strong R2P views. 

In August 2004, while happily perched at Harvard, Power wrote a lengthy piece for the New Yorker on the issue of Sudan where she lamented the slowness of the Bush administration to confront the killing of tens of thousands of Sudanese, questioned President Bush’s motives for confronting the killings, and criticized him for not getting other countries to help. 

“Neither President Bush nor Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, spoke publicly about the killings in Darfur before March of this year, by which time some thirty thousand people had died as a result of ethnic cleansing,” Power said. 

Even when giving President Bush credit for later dealing with the issue, Power cynically questioned his reasons. She said, “The stage was set: Bush would delight his Christian constituency; U.S. businesses would gain access to Sudan’s oil; and Sudanese civilians would stop dying.”

Yet once Power finally achieved a position of actual authority, she continuously failed to act or even forcefully speak out in favor of U.S. government action. 

She espoused little to no support of Iran’s 2009 Green Revolution when Iranian students and others took to the streets to protest the election of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

She sat silent during the crucial moments when the Syrian crisis first started and has remained absent for two years as 80,000 plus Syrians have been killed.

And despite years of fierce rhetoric against Bush for inaction in Darfur, she has become mute as genocide continues to ravage the region. 

An academic with zero real-world diplomatic experience, her biting words ring hollow from inside the White House.

Elizabeth Blackney, an NGO activist on human trafficking said, “For Samantha Power to be promoted is disturbing. She shed her record as an anti-genocide, human rights advocate for political power and affiliation. She became the bystander, the "person sitting in an office" implementing a bad policy that ensured greater suffering."

Sending Power to the United Nations sends the message that President Obama doesn’t care as much about actually helping the world’s vulnerable as he does about loyalty and academic prestige. 

Sadly, the U.S. may be represented at the U.N. by someone who has no multilateral diplomatic experience outside of one-hour classroom exercises. 

Power’s record at the NSC proves academic success means little in the real world, but all-too-much to the president of the United States.





headline: The gun debate is a culture debate
byline: By Trevor Burrus


Nearly three months after the tragedy in Newtown, Connecticut, we are still debating the place of guns in American society. That debate is not just about statistics and laws—it is about culture.

In a recent appearance on PBS's "NewsHour," Vice President Joe Biden admitted an assault weapons ban would do little to stop crime, but argued the weapons should still be banned if they don’t have “real utility either in terms of any sporting or self protection needs[.]”

Here, Biden forgets a founding American principle: we permit the government to have guns, not the other way around. Citizens don’t need to justify owning an “assault weapon,” the government needs to justify taking it.

Gun disgust is also one of the primary reasons gun-control advocates promote laws that have little to no effect on reducing gun violence.

Biden should be applauded for his honesty, but this begs the question: If honest gun-control advocates know that laws they support are ineffective, why fight for them? Because the gun debate is fundamentally a cultural debate.

One cultural tradition believes government is a necessary evil, best kept small, contained, and subordinate to the people.

The other tradition views government as a force for good that can often do better with fewer restraints.

One tradition views private gun ownership as important for resisting tyranny; the other views guns as, at best, a necessary evil, and at worst, something we should discard to become a fully civilized society.

Gun-control advocates scoff at the suggestion that personal arms can stand up to tanks and drones. But the anti-tyranny argument is not so much based on efficacy as it is on power: who has it and why.

In America, the government derives its power from the people. But the cultural divide goes deeper than the role of government.

Some Americans teach their children that gun ownership is a right a responsibility, and that guns are tools to respect and enjoy. Others discipline five-year olds for fashioning pretend guns out of pipe cleaners; they view guns with something resembling disgust.

Productive conversations about guns can thus be difficult because the anti-gun movement gives little to no weight to the values of private gun ownership. That is because “gun disgust” engenders a bias against guns.

In 2001, the American Medical Association recommended that doctors ask patients about gun ownership during office visits. They did not recommend that doctors ask about swimming pools or bicycles, both of which are much more likely to result in accidental deaths than a gun. Yet gun-control advocates have no problem “allowing” private swimming pools and bikes because they understand how someone could enjoy biking and swimming.

Gun disgust is also one of the primary reasons gun-control advocates promote laws that have little to no effect on reducing gun violence. On many questions, the debate over the effects of gun-control laws on crime is surprisingly uncontroversial.

The National Academy of Sciences found that gun-control laws have had no measurable effect on gun violence rates. The study was not written by gun-rights advocates—in fact, all but one member of the committee were gun-control advocates. Programs ranging from gun buybacks, to the famous “assault weapons” ban, to “gun-free zones,” were all found to be ineffective at curbing gun crime.

Gun disgust certainly explains the persistence of “gun-free zones” as a proposed solution to tragedies like Sandy Hook. If guns are viewed as contaminants, then the suggestion that teachers should be allowed to carry weapons on school grounds is revolting.

What is truly revolting, however, is when mass-shooters ignore the polite request to leave their guns at the door and take advantage of a building full of defenseless victims.

When challenged on the effectiveness of their proposed laws, many gun-control advocates will say, “Well, it’s a start.” And here is where gun-rights supporters get understandably worried about what “a start” means. Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) recently said in response to a question about whether the assault weapons ban is “just the beginning”: “Oh absolutely. I mean, I’m against handguns.”

When it comes to guns, the much ballyhooed red state/blue state cultural divide is real. If we want to have a productive discussion on guns we must find a way to cross this cultural divide.





headline: Whom to marry is the most important decision a woman will ever make
byline: By Suzanne Venker


Princeton graduate and mother Susan Patton finds the reaction to her article advising female Princetonians to find a husband before graduation “astonishing.” I’ve no doubt the backlash is shocking to Ms. Patton, but it’s not the least bit shocking to me. I’ve taken just as much heat for challenging the status quo when it comes to women, work and family.

Modern women aren’t supposed to talk about marriage, let alone embrace it. They’re supposed to stay focused on their education and careers and assume the rest of life will fall into place. It’s all so sad, since getting married and having kids marks the beginning of life—not the end.

I know it’s chic to think about marriage as something women do after they’ve sowed their oats, hiked the Appalachian Trail, and delved deep into their psyches to “find themselves.” I know the assumption is that their dream guy and wedding are waiting in the wings as a prize for all that soul searching. But honestly, it just doesn’t work that way.

Whether or not you are happily married will dictate the entire course of your life.

Nevertheless, I must respectfully disagree with Ms. Patton’s solution that women find husbands in college. A better plan, to the extent that women can plan such circumstances at all, is to find a husband in the subsequent five years—to a man who’s a few years older.

The modern generation is light years away from the maturity their parents exhibited when they were young, and this is especially true for men. In the past, college guys were prone to becoming good family men. They wanted to have sex, for one thing, which generally meant getting married. Men were also respected as providers and protectors of the family, which meant they took their career plans seriously.

Those days are gone. Marriage is no longer required for sex, and men can live with their girlfriends without commitment. They also don’t expect to be the sole provider when and if they do marry. The result is that men take twice as long to grow up. They don’t have a clear career path, and they avoid marriage like the plague. They know they can settle down later on by simply marrying a younger woman. Women don’t have that option.

But the more important aspect of the discussion is this. Of all the choices women will make in their lifetime, none is as important as deciding whom to marry. None. Whether or not you are happily married will dictate the entire course of your life. It will measure the flow of your days, be the determiner of your children’s well being, even color your view of the world. You will take a good marriage or a bad marriage with you everywhere you go. It is the barometer for everything else you do.

Why, then, would we encourage women to spend all their the time and energy preparing solely for a career? As Patton aptly notes, “Too much focus has been placed on encouraging young women only to achieve professionally. I think in the back of their heads, they all know this, but nobody is saying it.”

I’ve been saying it for years. I’ve written four books and countless articles encouraging women to not only carve out ample space for marriage and children but to embrace this side of life. There is more to life than work. Even when work is powerful and lucrative, it isn’t enough.

But women can’t absorb this message as long as their careers are hailed by society as their raison d'être. Indeed, the quandary modern women face is twofold: how to find a mature man to marry, and how to rectify their desire for independence with their desire for love.

The answer to the first part is simple: women need to stop being so sexually available to men. Make men earn your love and your body. Men need incentive to get married—they don’t need to nest in quite the same way women do.

The answer to the second part isn’t complicated either; it’s just different from what women have been taught to believe. The other day I received an email from a woman named Alana, 28, who writes,

I love children. I do not have my own and society has, yes, convinced me to run from the home, as you put it. It’s true, and it’s sad. I now feel as if I need to end my relationship with a perfectly good man to chase my career aspirations. Why do I feel this way, and what is the correct avenue? Upon reaching this point, the goal was to pursue my career with fervor. Do I deny these urges now that I’m finally able to support myself and settle into what I hope will be a meaningful career?

Women like Alana are everywhere. I know that because I hear from them all the time, and they all ask some version of the same thing: When is it going to be okay for women to feel good about their desire to get married and have children?

So let me say this to Alana and all the other women out there who are in the same boat: No, you should not deny your urge to nest. Build a family, and make it the center of your life. There is a time and a place for everything in life.

Don’t let this one pass you by.





headline: IRS targeted and leaked info about a group I am affiliated with
byline: By Christian Whiton


As Congress and the public struggle to comprehend the scandals rocking the Obama administration, it is important not to overlook a common thread linking all of the misconduct: the administration’s paranoia that voters would see it as weak on national defense.

For having the temerity to raise questions about U.S. policy toward terrorists and Iran, Israel and North Korea, the Obama IRS targeted a non-partisan group with which I am affiliated and illegally leaked its confidential information.

The White House’s paranoia about public perceptions of foreign threats also drove its scandalous surveillance of Associated Press (AP) reporters.

The Obama administration has demonized and harassed those who posed inconvenient questions about its policies.

It is also at the heart of the cover-up over the attack in Benghazi that resulted in the death of the U.S. ambassador to Libya.

Secure America Now, on whose advisory board I serve, has criticized and supported politicians of all political stripes.

For example, the organization critiqued the Republican governor of New Jersey when he derided the New York Police Department’s monitoring of suspected terrorists. And the non-partisan organization criticized the independent mayor of New York for supporting the construction of a mosque near Ground Zero.

Secure America Now also posed questions about the Obama administration’s approach to terrorism and other national security issues.

For example, last October, the organization released a short video that criticized Mr. Obama’s reaction to the Benghazi attack. The widely viewed video contrasts misleading statements by Obama officials with those of reporters and the victims’ family members.

As a Wall Street Journal article revealed last week, the IRS has held up Secure America Now’s application for 501(c)4 status for more than two years and counting.

Furthermore, the IRS illegally provided confidential information about Secure America Now to an organization the White House counts among its political allies.

Such leaks are intended to scare off supporters by signaling they too may be illegally targeted and harassed. This is a method of civic disenfranchisement.

The White House’s paranoia is also at the heart of the AP reporter surveillance scandal. The administration contends that it was necessary to spy on AP journalists’ household, office and cell phone usage over two months because a leak to the AP potentially revealed sensitive information about a counterterrorism operation. Attorney General Eric Holder even said the leak “put the American people at risk.”

In fact, what the story revealed was that Al Qaeda was planning to attack the United States on the anniversary of Usama bin Laden’s death—an attack prevented by diligent professionals in America’s intelligence and law enforcement agencies.

The AP delayed the story until the CIA said its release would no longer pose a risk. However, the existence of the threat contradicted President Obama’s claim that Al Qaeda “was on its heels”—a major talking point in his reelection campaign. The foiled attack would have occurred less than six months before the election.

Thus all three scandals—the Benghazi cover-up, the unprecedented spying on AP journalists, and the IRS affair—all involve national security to varying degrees.

Exploring the foreign threats facing America and debating the performance of the man elected to manage them is the type of lawful civic activity that is essential to healthy democracy. Rather than accept this, the Obama administration has demonized and harassed those who posed inconvenient questions about its policies.

Why did officials go to such great lengths to do this? After all, using government power for illicit political purposes could put officials on the wrong side of laws like the Internal Revenue Code, the Hatch Act, the Privacy Act, and the Ethics in Government Act.

The general motive is apparent: the administration’s determination to win a second term. This is of course the primary wish of any first-term administration. But the actions of officials went far beyond what is acceptable and legal.

Ahead of a close election, Obama administration officials went to extraordinary lengths to try to silence numerous groups and individuals, including those concerned with foreign threats that are evolving rapidly and drawing nearer.





headline: The monstrous abortion trial the media don’t want you to know about
byline: By Dan Gainor


When the Newtown shooting took the lives of 20 children, the nation was justifiably horrified. Journalists reported round the clock on ways to change public policy to prevent another shooting. But when seven children and a mother died in a Philadelphia abortion clinic dubbed a “house of horrors,” the major media couldn’t have cared less.

It’s a news story that reads more like a Hollywood torture plot – “Saw” or “Hostel” or some other movie so foul that it makes you want to take a shower just having viewed it.

Only this case is real and the media are keeping it real quiet because it betrays the barbarity of the abortion industry in open court, where they can’t hide. It’s all about abortion “doctor” Kermit Gosnell and the purportedly Medieval facility he ran to kill babies – both before they were born and after, claim prosecutors. Eight clinic employees have already pleaded guilty to “various charges.”

ABC, CBS and NBC have spent 41 minutes and 26 seconds telling viewers about the Rutgers basketball scandal. And not a second about baby murder in Philadelphia.

“Gosnell is charged with killing seven babies born alive, along with Karnamaya Mongar a newly-arrived, 41-year-old refugee from Bhutan. Prosecutors say Gosnell's staff gave the 90-pound woman a lethal dose of anesthesia and painkillers during a 2009 abortion,” according to the Associated Press.

ABC has never carried that story. Not once. Neither has NBC. CBS did … back in 2011 when Gosnell was first arrested. The rest of the media landscape is an equal travesty. CNN did one story on it in 2013, even though the trial has been going on for more than three weeks. Fox has covered it more than most of its TV kin, but it has surprisingly not done a lot.

It’s OK, they’ve been too busy with basketball. Yes, ABC, CBS and NBC have spent 41 minutes and 26 seconds telling viewers about the Rutgers basketball scandal. And not a second about baby murder in Philadelphia. Of course, Rutgers Coach Mike Rice did throw basketballs at grown men, deploy “abusive behavior” and, worst of all, use “homophobic slurs.”

Gosnell’s charges seem mild by comparison. He is charged with murdering seven viable, born-alive babies “by plunging scissors into their spinal cords.” Sherry West, who worked for Gosnell, recently testified she saw an 18- to 24-inch-long newborn. “It didn't have eyes or a mouth but it was like screeching, making this noise. It was weird. It sounded like a little alien,” she told the court.

“A former clinic worker who grew up in Mt. Lebanon testified on Thursday that he routinely saw babies born and then killed with scissors in an inner-city Philadelphia clinic that catered to minorities, the poor and women with late-term pregnancies,” reported AP. The worker estimated the number of babies he saw killed at about 100.

Despite all that, print publications haven’t covered the story much either. The local papers, such as the Philadelphia Inquirer, have done a fantastic job covering a story that is so ghastly that its reporters will probably never stop having nightmares. Lexis-Nexis credits the Inquirer with more than 140 stories about the topic, each more gruesome than the last.

But the national papers have largely ignored it. The New York Times, the land of “All the News That's Fit to Print” only found this mass murder story “fit” four times, just once in 2013. The Washington Post has mentioned it three times, but not since April 11 of 2012.

The liberal press has been almost as silent. Lefty Salon had a few AP stories, but only ones that undermined the charges against the doctor. Those include: “Doc disputes ‘killings’ at Philly abortion clinic” and “Med. examiner, lawyer clash at doc’s murder trial.”

The liberal Huffington Post, on which so many journalists rely for their news, was equally dismissive. It’s run a couple wire stories, but those conveniently left out the most heinous aspects of the trial.

Surprisingly, the whacko site Alternet included one condemnation of Gosnell, but it did to hold the line on unlimited abortion. The site ran the text of a speech by Dr. Jennefer Russo ofPhysicians for Reproductive Choice and Health. While she admitted, “what happened in Philadelphia in the office of Kermit Gosnell is an atrocity,” she still defended abortion as a way to “protect women’s health.” Perhaps she hasn’t been following the trial.

Or maybe she has and the abortion industry doesn’t care what happens as long as it adds to the 50 million aborted babies since Roe v. Wade. That was certainly the impression given by Alisa LaPolt Snow, the lobbyist representing the Florida Alliance of Planned Parenthood Affiliates. She testified that how to handle a child born from a botched abortion “should be left up to the woman, her family, and the physician.” Someone needs to teach Planned Parenthood that abortions after a child is born are murder.

Sadly, that story also has received no attention. Journalists are quick to worry about “extreme” ways states are trying to curtail abortion. But clearly, murdering babies is not the news media’s definition of “extreme.”

Twenty conservative leaders including L. Brent Bozell, of the Media Research Center, Tony Perkins, of the Family Research Council, and Jeanne Monahan, of March for Life Education and Defense Fund, have all demanded the media stop censoring this ghoulish trial. In an open letter, they concluded: “This cover-up is a national disgrace.”

The oddest thing about the media blackout is how it defies everything news folks ordinarily do. Journalists aren’t just predictable, they are stunningly so. Give them a Casey Anthony, Amanda Knox, Scott Peterson and more, and they will be reporting it, desperate for the attention and ratings.

That is, unless it makes the Merchants of Death at Planned Parenthood look bad. Then that story will be ignored, no matter how many babies die in the process.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Jimmy Carter’s famous speech, Gordon Stewart and Gabriel Sherman on the need to keep history separate from fantasy
byline: By Patrick Caddell


Sometimes little things crack open and reveal big things. For example, what started as a small dispute--over the historical record of a presidential speech from four decades ago--has now metastasized into a raging controversy over a new book about Roger Ailes and Fox News, written by the veteran author Zev Chafets.

And that controversy over Chafets has, in turn, opened up a window into the practice of “journalism” by some young “journalists” of our own time. Indeed, the controversy has shined a deeply unflattering light on the author of yet another book on Ailes and Fox, forthcoming from author Gabriel Sherman. As we shall see, the evident sloppiness of Sherman’s research could lead one to think that the mere publication of his book will go beyond controversy. Its publication would, in and of itself, be a scandal.

I’ll come back to that big story in a bit. But first, the small story, which is, in fact, important in its own way.

On March 21, one Gordon Stewart, a small newspaper publisher in Putnam County, New York--where he is in direct business competition with another small newspaper publisher, Beth Ailes, wife of Roger Ailes--took to the pages of Politico to attack Chafets. Stewart described Chafets’ brief mentions of him in the pages of his book, Roger Ailes: Off Camera, as “ignorant, arrogant and fraudulent” and “breathtakingly bogus.” What was Stewart’s beef? Why was he so vociferous against Chafets? After all, the points in question were made by Chafets in passing; the subject of the Chafets book is Ailes, not Stewart. Stewart is, at most, a minor character.

It seems to me that Stewart chose to go after Chafets so strongly because he, Stewart, sees the opportunity to attack Chafets as a “twofer”--that is, as an opportunity to attack the Ailes family as well.

After all, the Chafets book was regarded by many--especially those in the camp of rival biographer Sherman--as too friendly to Ailes. And so Stewart, perhaps, wanted to dump on the Chafets book as a way of helping the Sherman book. Is all this inside baseball? Sure it is. But it’s still interesting, because it reveals much about the way reporters and writers can sometimes serve larger business and political agendas.

And so, for example, it helps Stewart, up in Putnam County, if he can inflict damage on Chafets and thus the Ailes family.

Yet there’s more to Stewart than that. I met him in the late 70s, when we both worked for President Jimmy Carter--he in the White House speechwriting shop, me as a senior outside adviser, strategist, and pollster to the President.

For years now, I have been bemused and bewildered as Stewart sought to retroactively inflate his role in the Carter administration. In particular, he insists on inflating his role in one particular incident, Jimmy Carter’s “Crisis of Confidence” speech of July 15, 1979, commonly referred to as the “malaise” speech. Some may say that it was not Carter’s greatest speech, but it is indisputable that it is his best-remembered speech--still a focus of interest and controversy. And in any case, it was an important event, a hinge in the Carter presidency, and so, for better or for worse, its history should be remembered accurately.

And so I was particularly annoyed to see, back on July 14, 2009, that Stewart had chosen to commemorate the 30th anniversary of that speech in a self-glorifying op-ed for The New York Times.

Yes, Stewart was a member of the Carter White House speechwriting staff, reporting to chief speechwriter Hendrik “Rick” Hertzberg. But in truth, he was more of a helper, and perhaps a stage-manager--but certainly not a principal author--of that famous speech. Matters of presentation and delivery are important, of course, to any politician, and so if Stewart had been content simply to define himself as a stage-manager, I would have had no complaint. And yet when I read this passage, below, describing the speechwriting process as it played out in July ’79 at the presidential retreat in Camp David, MD, I was taken aback. Because not only was it wrong and misleading, but Stewart knew it. Yet here’s what he wrote:

“Meanwhile, mostly secluded in a cabin, sometimes working day and night shifts, my colleague Hendrik Hertzberg and I wrote and rewrote what we had no idea would still be known 30 years later as “The Malaise Speech.”

Once again, it is simply incorrect to assert, as Stewart did, that he and Hertzberg co-authored the speech. I know, because I was there. The original draft of the speech was contained in a memo that I delivered to the President in the beginning of July; it was the last installment of a series of memos that the President had received, at his request, over a many-month process. And everyone involved knew that I, at the President’s direction, was the point person. In other words, it was a lengthy and deliberate policy-development process.

So I was the author of that original draft, with the invaluable help of Wayne Granquist of the Office of Management and Budget. In the subsequent speechwriting process, my friend Rick Hertzberg and I collaborated closely together as Rick brilliantly melded the original draft with new input from Stuart Eizenstat, Carter’s domestic policy adviser and others. And most of all, from Jimmy Carter himself. Yet that original draft remained the heart and soul of the speech Carter delivered.

Yet four summers ago, as I kept reading Stewart’s op-ed, I read with growing amazement the way in which Stewart incorrectly promoted himself to not only co-author, but also to author of the most important part of the speech. As Stewart put it:

“I recall scribbling faster than it seemed possible to put legible words on a pad, but the end result was: ‘On the battlefield of energy we can win for our nation a new confidence, and we can seize control again of our common destiny.’ The speech had found its central argument. The policy steps fell into place.”

As I said, I was annoyed at the time, but being involved in other things--and knowing that everyone intimately involved knew the truth about really happened, contrary Stewart’s claims--I chose to simply let the matter go. Yet now, as I see Stewart’s fantasy resurfacing, I have felt the need now to speak out and set the record straight.

Yet one who had a differing account, at the time, was Hertzberg, Stewart’s then-boss, who has long been a top writer for The New Yorker magazine. Three days after Stewart’s op-ed appeared in the Times, Hertzberg wrote his own account in The New Yorker, which gently, but nevertheless effectively, excluded any writing role for Stewart. Here’s how Hertzberg chronicled the moment:

“I was the designated writer for the speech that emerged from this curious process. In truth I was more stenographer-typist than author, smoothing and coordinating bits of draft from various people, including Caddell, Stuart Eizenstat, and Carter himself.”

Typical of Rick, he downplays the importance of his own role.

Later in the same piece, Hertzberg noted that Carter had done a good job in delivering the speech, and wrote generously of Stewart:

“Much of the credit for that must go to Gordon Stewart, who had been a theatre director in a previous life. (He was the original director of “The Elephant Man” on Broadway until felled by a collapsed lung.)”

Those of us who know Rick Hertzberg well and admire his fluid writing style can savor Rick’s deft way of reminding the reader that Stewart was, in fact, a stage-manager, not a speechwriter.

In that vein, Hertzberg continued with his account of those days:

"Gordon showed chutzpah beyond the call of duty. First he insinuated himself into the makeshift studio at Camp David where Carter was practicing the speech. That was pretty ballsy right there. But then, having crashed the President’s rehearsal, he proceeded to direct the man."

We can note some of these words and phrases that Hertzberg used to describe Stewart: “chutzpah beyond the call of duty,” “insinuated,” “ballsy,” “crashed the President’s rehearsal.” Hertzberg is describing Stewart as as acting like a stage manager, for sure, but not as an author. That was all on the record four years ago--Stewart taking credit for something he didn’t do. As noted, I should have weighed in at that time, too.

However, last week, when I saw that Stewart had trashed author Chafets for picayune inaccuracies in his Ailes book, I said to myself, “Enough is enough. If Stewart is going to dump on Chafets for tiny mistakes, then I should let everyone know that Stewart has been telling a whopper for years.” And so on March 22, here at Fox News Opinion, I wrote of Stewart:

“For years, now, he has been claiming that he did something that he did not, in fact, do. Nor, in fact, did Stewart have anything meaningful to do with it. To put it bluntly, Stewart is either misremembering or fantasizing about what happened. But either way, I can’t let his incorrect narrative become part of the historical record.”

Okay, so enough about Stewart. I suspect that he attacked Chafets out of a desire to hurt Beth and Roger Ailes. And I suspect that now, Stewart will be more circumspect in the future. Indeed, since I have all my files, including my personal files, on the “Crisis of Confidence” speech, I will in due time publish the inside account of what really happened in that fascinating and fateful summer of 1979.

But now here’s an interesting little twist to this tale--a twist that levers open that bigger window into the sloppy and shoddy “journalistic” practices of our time.

There’s a person named Gabriel Sherman, a writer for New York magazine and a fellow at the New America Foundation--a left-of-center think-tank to which George Soros and others in the Soros family have contributed--who is writing a book on Roger Ailes and Fox. In other words, Sherman and his book are in competition with Zev Chafets and his book.

Moreover, by many accounts, Sherman seems bent on publishing a hit job on Ailes and Fox.

Okay, fair enough, it’s a free country, and Sherman can write any book he wishes to write--although someone ought to be examining why it is that such writers can use tax-deductible foundation money for their obviously partisan ideological ends.

Yet perhaps Soros Co. should have looked more closely at Sherman and his work. Why? Because Sherman has been dogged by accusations of inaccuracy, and he seems to suffer not only from inaccuracy, but apparently also, as I have learned, from incompetence.

One thing is sure: Sherman is not short on chutzpah. In the wake of the publication of my column on Stewart last week--which I never mentioned Sherman at all--Sherman called me on the phone and said, “Hi, Pat.” There’s some chutzpah right there. I have never met Sherman, I never gave him my number, and, indeed, as a general practice, I don’t take calls from people to whom I haven’t given my number.

But then, as I tried say, “I don’t want to talk to you,” Sherman bulled ahead, saying, “I know that Roger Ailes put you up to it”--referring to my March 22 Fox piece. Now of course, Sherman doesn’t know any of that, because it’s not true. As the reader can surely tell, I have strong feelings about the accuracy of the historical record; that’s why I wrote the piece.

After that, I ended the conversation.

For his part, Sherman didn’t give up. In fact, he is the one pushing hardest to keep this story alive, I presume because he believes it will help gain traction for his own book.

Yet as Sherman struggles to gain that traction, he is making mistakes--bad mistakes. In a pair of tweets from March 27, Sherman wondered aloud, to the world, where I was getting the information from about Stewart. Sherman first asked:

"So far I haven't been able to find an example what Caddell is accusing Stewart of."

That is, my accusing Stewart of inflating his role in that 1979 speech. And then Sherman added in a second tweet:

"If anyone has seen an interview where Stewart has "claimed to be the author" of the malaise speech, please send along. Thanks."

When I saw those tweets, I couldn’t believe my eyes: Sherman was asking where I got the idea that Stewart had claimed to be the writer--or any kind of major player--in that speech? Really? Seriously? Can Sherman be that obtuse?

Well, once again, for the record, I might have gotten the idea that Stewart was exaggerating his role from Stewart’s own op-ed in The New York Times, dated July 14, 2009. The Times might not be nearly as important as it once was, but it’s still a pretty big paper, and Sherman, a resident of New York City, ought to be more familiar with it, and what’s in it. And if not, there’s always Nexis and Google to help out.

Okay, so enough on that. Now let’s focus on Sherman himself, and what he’s up to.

We might ask: What sort of book is Sherman writing? Is he really so unable to do basic research that, instead, he has to “crowdsource” a factual question through Twitter?

Indeed, such cluelessness, or laziness--or, perhaps on the side of the equation, purposefulness and relentlessness--ought to make people wonder about every article that Sherman has ever written.

What possible reason could he be doing this? Could he be simply ignorant--or intentionally ignorant?

But wait! It gets better! On Thursday, March 28, Sherman actually e-mailed me and wanted to know, yet again, where I got the idea that Stewart had once claimed to have written the 1979 “crisis of confidence” speech. Here’s the money quote from Sherman’s e-mail: “Can you point me to the published accounts where Stewart claimed to be the author of the speech? I have not be able to locate any references.”

As my grandkids would say, “Like, duh. Dude, do your homework.”

For the sake of the historical record, here’s the entirety of the e-mail:

From: Gabriel Sherman
Date: March 28, 2013, 10:11:30 AM EDT
To: Pat Caddell

Subject: Book Research: Your Foxnews.com Column

Dear Pat,

I hope you're well. I'm following up by email as you requested in our phone conversation last week. As I explained, in my upcoming book on Roger Ailes and Fox News, I write about your Foxnews.com column about Gordon Stewart. The column was recently reprinted in Elizabeth Ailes's newspaper, The Putnam County News Recorder.

In your column, you write: "Four years ago, in both print and in interviews, Stewart claimed to be the author of the 'crisis of confidence' speech."

Which interviews are you referring to? Can you point me to the published accounts where Stewart claimed to be the author of the speech? I have not be able to locate any references.

Thank you, I'm on a deadline so I look forward to being in contact at your earliest convenience.

best,

Gabe

Ladies and gentlemen of the historical jury, there you have it: a smoking gun of Sherman’s arrogance and/or ignorance--willful or otherwise. That is, he can’t or won’t find something that is plainly a part of the public record, and then he writes me a faux-friendly e-mail asking me to help him--and perhaps engage with him on other aspects of his Ailes book project.

So here’s my answer to you, Gabriel Sherman: I have taken all this time to write this lengthy and detailed piece on a matter that I thought had been put to be bed, succinctly, last week. Frankly, Mr. Sherman, you are an embarrassment to the journalistic trade, and if your book is in the same vein, it will be an embarrassment to your publisher and a disservice to the reading public.

Please take my advice: Grow up, get a life, and most of all, leave me alone. Got that?



Patrick Caddell is a Democratic pollster and Fox News contributor. He served as pollster for President Jimmy Carter, Gary Hart, Joe Biden and others. He is a Fox News political analyst and co-host of "Political Insiders" Sundays on Fox News Channel and Mondays at 10:30 am ET on "FoxNews.com Live."



headline: President Obama  the press -- how to heal a dysfunctional relationship
byline: By Ellen Ratner


Before I went to work covering the White House as a journalist, I worked in the mental health field for 20 years. And yes, I think that what I learned in mental health gives me a good perspective as I now cover politics and policy.

In each field, interventions are often needed! And this White House is a case in point.

Right now, for sure, the Obama administration is having plenty of problems: There’s the Benghazi talking points leak, the IRS revelations of looking at Tea Party groups, and, finally, the AP phone records being looked at by the Justice Department. Whew!

The president needs to show leadership, and he needs to start with better and more honest communication.

Each of these is an important concern in its own right, but I see them as part of a pattern of communication dysfunction.If the president and his team could communicate better, they could govern better. 

I should say immediately that I voted for President Obama twice. So I am not coming at my criticisms and concerns from the ideological right. 

Indeed, I want to see Barack Obama succeed, just as I want to see the United States of America succeed. That’s why I hope for the much-needed intervention. 

The key point here comes from my experience with “family systems theory.”

Family systems theory says that people behave in set patterns; those patterns can be mapped, and they are predicable.

Families have clear messages and rules which are never articulated but are nevertheless understood by family members.

All families have boundaries. How they are formed or violated says much about the family system. 

Finally, those family rules are usually set by the heads of the families. 

The White House press staff and the White House press corps can be thought of as a family system; they all must, like it or not, live under the same roof. And yes, the White House “family” has a head--that would be White House Press Secretary Jay Carney. 

To put it bluntly, Carney and his team have put in place “rules” that guarantee that the White House will not be a happy family. 

The first such “rule” is disregard for the press corps. Not everyone likes reporters, but they are human beings, and they have feelings. And yet Carney Co. routinely keep the pressies waiting past published times for events. 

In addition, in their decisions as to who gets to ask questions, they show a further contempt for the press corps. Perhaps most flagrantly, at least lately, on May 10th, Carney held a special “deep background” briefing on Benghazi held for certain selecct members of the White House Press corps--the rest of us were excluded. 

If a family therapist would take the chronic lateness and the preference of certain members of the press who are allowed to have a voice it would be clear that the system is anything but open. It is what would call it a “closed” system, and that means trouble.

Yet as with any dysfunctional relationship, the pain has a way of feeding back to all family members. It’s not just the White House press corps that suffers, it’s also the White House press staff. 

However, the big loser is the president himself, and his policies. His messaging has been thrown off by what is being done in his name.

Indeed, we can see how the dysfunctionality of the White House-White House press corps relationship has poisoned the whole of the administration’s policy efforts. Because, after all, policymakers, inside and outside of the White House, take their cues from the “head of household.” And that person, of course, is Jay Carney’s boss, the president of the United States. 

Even if the IRS folks were career staff or Bush era holdovers you do not need to be Dr. Freud to understand that the implicit message is that it is OK to limit what is said, to edit what is said or even to allow political thought and considerations to be a part of official actions.

It is well known that reporters have been given access or not depending on the kinds of stories that are written or broadcast.

If the message from the top is that signaling out groups (the IRS actions) or monitoring the press was unacceptable (the AP phone records) my guess is that this would not have happened.

Seeing this this from a family systems perspective, we only need to look at the overall actions to determine what rules this system has been operating under.

Boundaries have been violated. Gregory Hicks from the State Department testified before Congress last week that he was criticized for his management style only after he talked to a Member of Congress--before that he received nothing but compliments.That’s not a healthy signal to send. 

Moreover, the Associated Press’s phone records were taken by the Justice Department. The Benghazi talking points were rewritten and rewritten, seemingly with the goal of obscuring the truth.Indeed, we can see that Beth Jones, Assistant Secretary of State violated the boundaries of her job, so did the IRS, so did the Justice Department.

The system is crying out for help, for openness, for respect of boundaries and for new rules.

The president needs to show leadership, and he needs to start with better and more honest communication. That means answering all the press corps' questions, even from the smaller news outlets, even if the answers are in writing. It means not editing out what people want to say and acknowledging different viewpoints and perspectives.

It is the only way to heal this very dysfunctional system. I hope the president makes this much-needed intervention.





headline: Allowing non-citizens to participate in jury duty won't fix troubled system
byline: By Tamara Holder


The California State Assembly voted Thursday to amend its juror law, which currently applies only to to U.S. citizens, to include “lawfully present immigrants.” The legislation is now headed to the state Senate for another vote. California is the first state to attempt such an amendment.

The amendment reads in part:

"SECTION 1. Section 203 of the Code of Civil Procedure is amended to read: 203. (a) All persons are eligible and qualified to be prospective trial jurors, except the following: (1) Persons who are not lawfully present immigrants or citizens of the United States"

California legislators who voted in favor of this preposterous law clearly forgot that American citizenship is sacred.

People come to our country both legally and illegally because our country is such a beacon of freedom and opportunity. California is home to approximately 23 percent of the nation's undocumented immigrants, accounting for 1 of every 15 of its residents. Of course, we also have those who enter legally: In 2012 alone, over 1 million people became legal permanent residents of the U.S.

America is founded upon a Constitution filled with freedoms and rights, yet her citizens also have duties and obligations. One duty is that we, as citizens, are required to serve on a jury if called upon to do so. Each year, over 30 million Americans are summoned to jury duty.

Yet federal Judge William G. Young (nominated by President Reagan) has lamented, "The American jury system is dying. It is dying faster in the federal courts than in the state courts. It is dying faster on the civil side than that on the criminal side, but it is dying. It will never go entirely, but is is already marginalized.”

I slightly disagree with Judge Young. The jury system is not dying, but it is definitely struggling. Jury duty is not fun -- in fact, it is dreadful.

If summoned, you must appear or risk being fined by the court. A summons is an order. You are required to spend your day in an often dingy room at the courthouse, guarded by a sheriff, with other people who also have 1,000 better things to do than wait to be called into the courtroom.

If you are actually selected to sit on a jury, you may miss weeks or months of work.

The compensation is laughably minimal -- you cannot even buy a pair of socks with your “paycheck.”

Still this non-glamorous duty to our country and to each other rests at the core of American values and principles. We have a constitutional right to be judged by our peers, and we have a constitutional duty to judge the accused.

BOTTOM LINE: As citizens, we have a few chores that we must perform in order to keep America the greatest country in the world.

The solution to a struggling jury system is not to give non-citizen immigrants the same benefits as American citizens. We have a right to be tried by a "jury of our peers." Non-citizens are not our peers. Instead, our elected officials must work together from across the aisle to craft a legislative solution to problems with citizens' failures to participate in jury duty.





headline: Don't be fooled by a strong GDP report -- America's economy is slowing down
byline: By Peter Morici


Friday, forecasters expect the Commerce Department to report the economy grew a brisk 3.1 percent in the first quarter but don’t break out the champagne. Like a corporation with a spruced up profits statement at a critical shareholder meeting, several one-time factors contributed to this seemingly robust performance—the economy is already slowing and new crises are threatening.

In the fourth quarter, defense purchases and inventory investments were uncharacteristically weak and those rebounded in the New Year. Also, extraordinary year-end corporate bonuses and dividend payments, intended to soften the blow of higher 2013 taxes, pushed up consumer spending in January and February.

Those factors will not repeat in the second quarter, and January tax increases are finally starting to bite—consumers appear to have hunkered down, and confidence in the economic outlook is waning.

The economy is already slowing and new crises are threatening.

Higher payroll taxes and income taxes paid by the wealthy took away $165 billion in purchasing power. Working- and middle-class families adjust spending to accommodate higher taxes, but with a lag, because they need to keep driving to work and feeding their children—now car dealers and shopping malls report slowing sales.

For upper income families, changes in the tax code were extraordinarily complex, and many pay taxes on a quarterly basis on self employment and investment income. The full impact of higher taxes on their after-tax income was not reckoned until their accountants computed their first 2013 tax payment due April 15—now they will be trimming purchases too.

Along with sequestration, higher taxes will subtract more than $200 billion from household purchasing power and government spending—that will slow demand for what Americans make and GDP growth, and make jobs tougher to find.

A key element of the tax changes—reduced mortgage interest deduction—will dampen existing home sales. Aided by the Federal Reserve’s easy money policies and a surge of wealthy buyers from Europe’s troubled economies, speculative investors have been scarfing up properties in choice markets in Florida, New York City and elsewhere with cash offers that frequently squeeze out ordinary homebuyers seeking a permanent primary residence.

In several markets, prices have zoomed past what these ordinary buyer’s incomes will support; hence, speculators bets require that somehow after-tax household incomes will somehow surge permitting them to unload at a profit. That is a dubious assumption, and the speculative surge cannot end well—housing price increases will slow, plateau or could crash all together. The housing market bump to household wealth that supported consumer spending in recent months will relent.

Similarly, the Fed’s low-interest policies are boosting stock and agricultural land values—at a pace beyond what future profitability of either asset class should sustain. Either slower growing values or outright adjustments appear inevitable, and the resulting drag on consumer spending will slow the recovery.

The continuing surge of Chinese exports onto American store shelves, and weakening demand for U.S. products in recession torn Europe are dampening demand for U.S. manufactures. Japan’s weak yen policy is imposing tougher competition on U.S. automakers and other manufacturers of technology-intensive products. Already, the Commerce department reported durable goods orders fell 5.7 percent in March, indicating much slower sales going forward.

The bottom line: most forecasters expect growth to slow to less than 2 percent in the second quarter and to remain below 3 percent through the end of 2014.





headline: Would you support parole for O.J.?
headline: Marriage equality, the Supreme Court and the Chief Justice’s cousin
byline: By Sally Kohn


Today, the Supreme Court considered a case about whether voters in a state can pass a law that arguably violates the Constitution of the United States of America. The case about to decide the fate of California’s Prop 8 is tangled up with the details of legal procedure and constitutional interpretation to the point where some analysts speculate the Court might dodge a ruling altogether on technical grounds.

But the details sort of don’t matter --- what is really on trial this week is the future of equal treatment for gay Americans. And the fact is, the tide is flowing forcefully in the direction of fairness and equality. The Supreme Court will either ride the wave or try to block it or dodge it, but ultimately it doesn’t really matter. The tide has irrevocably turned.

The fundamental equality of gay Americans is lapping against every shore of America from the Bible Belt to the Republican National Committee. A leader in the Southern Baptist Convention recently reported that young people within the conservative church think opposing same-sex marriage “feels intolerant.” The RNC “autopsy” report advised softening the party’s stance on gay rights issues and prominent Republicans including Sen. Rob Portman have announced their support for marriage equality. Republicans are finally catching up with mainstream public opinion, which has been quickly evolving to now-majority support for gay marriage. And among the observers inside the Court today was Jean Podrasky, the lesbian cousin of Chief Justice John Roberts. The Chief Justice, a conservative, gave Podrasky one of his private tickets. 

It’s worth noting that even the lawyers defending Prop 8 aren’t arguing against the morality of gay marriage but merely trying to say the matter should be left to the states. Anti-gay bias and bigotry is quickly falling out of fashion.

Of course, the Supreme Court should not be swayed by personal sentiment or popular opinion. A founding principle of our nation is that fundamental rights should never be subject to popular vote --- whether the right to equal treatment under the 14th Amendment or the right to own guns under the 2nd Amendment. The judiciary exists to hold politicians and the people accountable to a higher standard, to ensure that majority rule doesn’t trample on minority rights. It is the job of the Supreme Court to hold federal, state and local governments accountable to our founding doctrines and the rule of law --- including the idea that government cannot pass a law discriminating against a group of people without a “legitimate purpose”.

More than 1,138 rights and benefits at the federal level accrue to couples based on marriage, from inheriting assets tax free to accessing spousal visas for immigration purposes. Gay couples don’t want to change the marriages of straight couples in any way nor force religious institutions to perform weddings against their conscience. This is simply about getting the same legal rights as other families. In fact, the California’s Prop 8 isn’t really about marriage any more than anti-sodomy statutes were about sex. The point of both was to enshrine second-class status for gay Americans. And that is not a “legitimate purpose” for government discrimination.

It is unclear from today’s hearings how the Court might rule on Prop 8. It remains entirely possible that the Court might dodge the substantive question or rule on narrow grounds that only affect the State of California and not the rest of the country. Whatever it does, the rights of hundreds of thousands of families like mine will be profoundly affected by whatever the Supreme Court rules on two marriage equality cases it is hearing this week. Without question, what the Court rules will make a difference in the short-term legal and political realities faced by same-sex couples.

But when Martin Luther King spoke about justice rolling “down like water and righteousness like a mighty stream,” he evoked the long arc of history that ultimately bends toward equal treatment and fairness for all. The Supreme Court may hurry the pace of justice or slow it down or dodge it altogether, but the sanctioning of anti-gay bias and legalized discrimination against gay families will someday soon be nothing more than an ugly relic of the past.

When Chief Justice Roberts was being confirmed for the Court, his lesbian cousin, a liberal, enthusiastically backed his appointment. Why? “He is family,” she explained, articulating the shared values that we as a nation must continue to strive for as well.





headline: Mike Rice doesn’t speak for me
byline: By Matt McLeod


Basketball is a sport of full of passion and raw emotion. I should know, I’ve been around it all my life. I grew up a stone’s throw off Tobacco Road in North Carolina. In college, I spent time as a student manager at a NCAA Division I school. And now I have the privilege of coaching high school basketball in Texas.

This passion and emotion is a key factor in what makes the sport so great. Don’t believe me? Turn on your TV any weekend in March. There you’ll see more than your fair share of buzzer beaters, upsets, Cinderella slippers and feel-good stories that could fill a dozen future Disney films.

But unfortunately, we were all reminded this week that the same passion and emotion can have just the same negative impact on a coach, team and school.

On Tuesday, ESPN’s “Outside The Lines” introduced us all to video footage of then Rutgers men’s basketball head coach Mike Rice firing everything at his players from basketballs to obscenities and anti-gay slurs.

I saw these offenses myself for the first time courtesy of a video clip on a friend’s Facebook wall. Immediately, my mind began doing its best to define the images I was seeing. Inexcusable. Undefendable. Horrifying. Head-scratching.

Then I discovered the kicker. These images weren’t filmed at Rutgers practices that took place this month, or even this year.

When I found out these tapes were first made available to the Rutgers athletic department in November of last year, I couldn’t believe that Rice had been allowed to keep his job.

I was floored. How could an institution of higher education deem these actions as OK? Especially a school with a self-proclaimed “rich history of more then 240 years.”

The fact that Coach Rice (or any Rutgers employee for that matter) would be allowed to keep their job after actions like those astounds me. How could anyone in position of leading young people be allowed to continue to do so after such behavior?

Not only do his actions violate the trust a coach should have with his players, but it also falls well short of the basic ideal of human decency.

To be perfectly clear, I don’t know Coach Rice. I’ve never met him. The high school gym I coach in is 1,742 miles away from the campus of Rutgers in Newark, N.J. 

But what I do know is that both he and I are given the same opportunities as coaches. It’s an opportunity that he and I share with tens of thousands of coaches across the country -- all the way from junior high through high school and college.

It’s an opportunity to play various roles in the lives of our athletes. As coaches we are called to be teachers, counselors, skill developers, motivators, disciplinarians and so much more.

We are given the opportunity to lead our players in such a way that when they leave our program, they are better men (or women) than when we first met them. We are given the task of preparing them to have a great and lasting impact on the world around them.

As Coach John Wooden once put it, we as coaches are tasked with helping players understand that "what you are as a person is far more important than what you are as a basketball player."

And while Coach Rice’s poor judgment may lead to trust issues among the general public towards those in my profession, I am very proud to say that I know his actions are the exception, and not the rule, for those of us in the coaching fraternity.

What happened within the men’s basketball program at Rutgers is unacceptable. Even Coach Rice himself has admitted it. And I don’t think anyone would disagree.

But understand this -- the world of high school and college athletics is full of coaches who are not only winning games on the court, but they’re building winners in everyday life with the players they coach. I’ve been around them. I’ve seen them do it.

Let’s focus less on the lives of coaches like Mike Rice and more on the ones of those like John Wooden. That’s what the game of basketball is truly about.



headline: Don't be fooled, your heartburn could be serious
byline: By Dr. W. Chris Dengler


Heartburn can become an escalating problem if ignored. It can also be a dangerous condition if it is masked by just taking antacids. 

Most people believe, however, that recurring acid reflux is a normal part of over-eating or sampling spicy food. These acid reflux sufferers don’t realize that one out of every three adults struggle with heartburn and regurgitation on a monthly basis, with 50 million people battling symptoms several times per week. 

A nagging problem of heartburn and acid reflux seems easy to fix when watching the many pharmaceutical commercials claiming that a colored pill, taken daily, can solve the problem; in fact many Americans have accepted big pharma’s suggested solution as an easy fix to their woes. 

If you have heartburn for longer than 14 days then you have a bigger problem than a pill can help solve.

Today, the drug industry sells over $14 billion in heartburn medications. The popular drug is in a class called proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) that work by reducing the amount of acid produced within the stomach.

Unfortunately, the millions of people who take these prescription drugs or over the counter medications are masking a serious and developing problem. 

Unknown to millions of people regularly taking PPI pills to solve their heartburn is that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration warning labels on these prescription drugs clearly states that patients should take the pills for no more than 14 days of temporary relief. 

Two weeks of blocked calcium production in your stomach is the maximum timeframe recommended by medical doctors to mask acid reflux without being under the care of a physician—any longer can have serious negative consequences.

If you have heartburn for longer than 14 days then you have a bigger problem than a pill can help solve.

The stomach pains or burning sensation you feel are signals from your body that something is wrong. An acidic stomach is normal and is necessary for the efficient digestion of food. 

So why are you getting those pains frequently? Simple, it is due to a small valve at the end of your esophagus called the LES, or your lower esophageal sphincter. 

A healthy LES acts as barrier in keeping stomach contents where they belong -- in your stomach.

The LES frequently becomes damaged, and when it does, those acidic stomach contents can flow up into the esophagus. When stomach acid leaves your stomach, it can be painful. 

In fact, over 200,000 individuals visit emergency rooms each year believing they are having a heart attack only to learn that their pain was from acid reflux and not from a heart problem. 

Unfortunately, for a segment of those with reflux disease, heartburn can progress to a precancerous condition called Barrett’s Esophagus, and in some cases, it can advance to adenocarcinoma, better known as esophageal cancer. 

In fact, the incidence of esophageal cancer is the fastest growing of all cancers in the U.S., outpacing melanomas, breast and prostate cancers.

PPIs have proven to relieve symptoms, and for several medical conditions, they are highly valuable for short to mid-term use. 

However, they are not a cure. 

As they cannot strengthen or repair the LES, the cause of gastroesophageal reflux disease, they can only mask the symptoms. As a result, the disease continues indefinitely.

At a recent gastroesophageal conference, Dr. David Kleiman with the Department of Surgery at New York Presbyterian Hospital and Weill Cornell Medical College presented a research study documenting that 32% of PPI use beyond an initial 8-week trial was unnecessary since there was "no evidence of reflux disease" with those individuals. 

According to Dr. Kleiman, “PPIs continue to be misused and overused in a large percent of our population.” 

If you are experiencing regular heartburn and think you are solving your problem by consistently taking an acid production blocker, you may be masking a serious problem. 

Even worse, you could be increasing your troubles by subjecting yourself to the dangerous and common side-effects of routine PPI usage. 

Instead of turning to costly, unnecessary, and often dangerous pills, you should consult your physician and create a real plan to manage your acid reflux.





headline: Gosnell trial revealed horrors of abortion, media silence
byline: By Dan Gainor


Mengele. Kevorkian. Now Gosnell can be added to that awful list. Men who perverted the idea that medicine should indeed “first do no harm.”

Dr. Kermit Gosnell was on trial for his life for the first degree murder of four babies born as a result of a failed late-term abortion. The American media that had resisted covering the gruesome case were also on trial.

Both were found guilty.

Followers of the Philadelphia case weren’t surprised with either result.

The facts in the Gosnell case read more like a demon’s resume than a description of a man sworn to heal.

Gosnell is a monster. He was initially charged “with killing seven babies born alive," along with Karnamaya Mongar a newly-arrived, 41-year-old refugee from Bhutan.

Prosecutors say Gosnell's staff gave the 90-pound woman a lethal dose of anesthesia and painkillers during a 2009 abortion,” according to the Associated Press. Some charges were dropped and he was found guilty of three counts of first-degree murder and one count of third-degree murder, as well as “211 counts of failing to comply with a state law that requires a 24-hour waiting period before an abortion is performed.”

The facts read more like a demon’s resume than a description of a man sworn to heal. One former worker testified that she saw “a late-term baby who survived an abortion ‘swimming’ in a toilet and ‘trying to get out.’”

Another child reportedly was big enough “that Gosnell joked it could have walked to the bus.” Child after child had life ended as scissors snipped spinal cords, decapitating them.

Yet this “house of horrors” would never have seen the light of day if the American media had their way.

Major outlets ignored the story until conservative anger called them out. The Media Research Center (where I work), Kirsten Powers, Fox News Channel, some in Congress and an army of conservatives on Twitter provided part of the pressure.

Even then, news coverage was paltry – far less than outlets would devote to any story du jour from Manti Te’o and his invisible girlfriend to endless accounts of the Jodi Arias trial.

ABC was the worst. It took that network a couple years after the arrest and 56 straight days of trial to acknowledge Gosnell existed. ABC found more than three hours of air time for other court cases during that time, but waited until Gosnell was convicted before it ever admitted he was even on trial.

“Nightline” co-anchor Terry Moran inadvertently admitted the network’s failure during the May 13 “World News with Diane Sawyer” segment. “For two months, jurors heard often shocking, grisly testimony.” Yes, two months of “shocking, grisly testimony” and only one minute and 51 seconds of news coverage at the very end.

In short, if you rely on ABC for your news coverage, you are out of luck. It’s that kind of timely newsgathering that would have viewers expecting to see reports on the end of WWII or the sinking of the Titanic later this week.

The other two members of the Big Three didn’t impress either. NBC was bad and CBS only a little better. NBC’s Savannah Guthrie asked Obama a question about Gosnell but didn’t even bother to follow it up. And when NBC finally gave an actual report on the case on May 1, it hid the awful nature of the case. The network that had reported on the smell of a decomposing body in the Casey Anthony trial called Gosnell’s crimes “too gruesome” to tell viewers.

Other outlets were just as averse to reporting the awful story of baby murder. The Washington Post committed to the story after health reporter Sarah Kliff defended her own failure to cover Gosnell because it was a “local crime” story.

But it wasn’t a local crime story. It was part of a national belief in infanticide coming directly from the pro-abortion movement. Just in the time of the Gosnell trial, we’ve seen a Planned Parenthood lobbyist and an abortion doctor both show support for baby murder after the child is born.

Abortion lobbyist Alisa LaPolt Snow told an astonished hearing that the life of a baby born after a botched abortion should be “left up to the woman, her family, and the physician.”

The pro-life group Live Action caught a D.C. abortion doctor in an embarrassing admission of, you know, supporting baby murder. “One video features a D.C. doctor, Cesare Santangelo, who said that in the unlikely event that an abortion resulted in a live birth, ‘we would not help it,’” reported the Post. For that reveal, he said he considers the heroes of Live Action to be “terrorists.”

That is the world that Kermit Gosnell introduced to America. It’s a world where the liberal fantasies of “safe, available and rare” abortions have been twisted into a convenient rationale for taxpayer-funded baby murder, even after a child is born. It’s an image the abortion community won’t be able to erase.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Things to fight for this Father’s Day
byline: By Craig Groeschel


As bullying problems land in the headlines month after month, it’s natural that our culture frowns upon any form of fighting. And for Christians, the familiar verse about turning the other cheek leads many of us to a place where we see fighting as a failure in living out our faith.

Do you want my reaction as a father? As a pastor? Teach your son to fight. That’s what he’s made to do.

That’s right—our sons need to learn how to fight. In addition to learning how to fight, more importantly they need to know when to fight and why to fight. They also need to learn when to walk away.

God has given us a divine desire to fight for righteousness.

But saying there’s no place for fighting just isn’t true.

And guess who your child needs to hear that from? That’s right, YOU.

The father. The grandfather. The brother-filling-in-as-a-father. The man who knows your heavenly Father, and knows that you were made to fight.

I read a book recently that suggested our culture has tried to turn good men into women—nicer, softer, kinder, more compassionate and fashion savvy. Forgive me for stating the obvious, but men are not women. (For the record, women don’t make good men, either.) After all, God created us differently. “So God created human beings in his own image; in the image of God he created them; male and female he created them” (Genesis 1:27, NLT). Both men and women reflect the image of God, but in unique, distinct ways.

God created men with the heart of a warrior, placing within us a desire to stand up and fight for what’s pure, for what’s true. A man has a warrior’s heart. That’s God’s design, not ours. That doesn’t mean all men should be aggressive, alpha bullies. It simply means God has given us a divine desire to fight for righteousness.

Before you train the boys around you to pick a fight for no reason at school, let me caution you. I’m not advocating violence. I’m simply encouraging you to help those around you learn to stand up for what is right.

Why does this matter? A man without a cause from God is often just an angry man who doesn’t know where to direct his pent-up energy and aggression. A warrior with a cause from God directs that war-like energy toward a cause greater than himself.

Until there’s something you’re willing to die for, you can’t truly live.

Your sons are created to fight for righteousness. Until you help them tap into that divine cause, they’ll be bored, destructive, and frustrated.

We need to help re-define the way they think about what it means to be a warrior. It’s not about cockiness and attitude, not about six-pack abs and picking fights, not about succeeding in life and winning everyone’s admiration or envy.

Being a true warrior is about knowing the source of true strength. It’s about knowing your own weaknesses and turning to God to empower you to be the man he made you to be.

You don’t have to become Jason Bourne or James Bond (Sean Connery or Daniel Craig—not those other wimps) to be a warrior.

Not only does God want you to fight, but he wants to give you a cause greater than yourself. Then, once you love something enough that you’re willing to die for it, you’ll be set free to live.

Consider what the leader Joab said to inspire his warriors in 2 Samuel 10:12: “Be strong and let us fight bravely for our people and the cities of our God” (emphasis mine). Fight for a cause greater than yourself. It’s in you.

You know it’s there. You can feel it. You have the heart of a warrior.

Maybe you’re thinking, I don’t know, Craig. I’m a laid-back dude, peaceful, live and let live. I’m not really into the whole fight club scene. "Call of Duty’s" an awesome video game, but actually, I don’t even know if I know how to fight.

It’s OK if you don’t think of yourself as a warrior, at least in earthly terms. But God has made you to fight a battle. And he’s given us many spiritual weapons. What’s important for us to remember is that the strongest man is not the one who lifts the most weight, but the one who has the most faith.

Others of you may be thinking, “There really is a battle brewing. And I can’t afford to lose it.” If that’s you, it’s time for you to fight. Maybe you’re in danger of failing financially. Now is the time to fight like your life depends on it.

To get control of your budget and align your priorities with your cash flow. Perhaps you’re playing with a lustful fire.

You keep returning to images and people and places that excite you but also unleash something you’re afraid you can’t control. You’re going to get burned. Decide. Confess and overcome this darkness.

You don’t want your sons to go through life not knowing how to stand up for truth or fight against dangerous temptations. For their sake—fight. And don’t just fight like a man. Show them how to fight like a man—of God!

The best way to teach them to fight is to show them what it looks like. If you want your sons to learn how to fight, show them what it looks like to fight for what’s right.

Your marriage might be hanging by a thread. Determine to never surrender. Use love, patience, and forgiveness. Lay down your life and save your marriage.

Maybe your kids are making dangerous decisions. Get down on your knees and fight like a man of faith!

Learn how to fight with faith, with prayer, and with the Word of God. Then, when your enemy begins to attack, fight for the righteous cause that God gave you.

Draw a line in the sand. Make your enemy pay: Don’t cross a warrior. Don’t mess with this man of God. Come out fighting.

And when you fight—don’t fight clean. Use the weapons God gave you, and you’ll win in more ways than you could imagine. Can you feel it? It’s inside you.

It’s time to fight like a man.



Craig Groeschel is the pastor of the nation’s second largest church, LifeChurch.tv in Edmond, Okla., and the author of several books. His most recent book is "Altar Ego: Becoming Who God Says You Are" (Zondervan) His next book, "Fight: Winning the Battles That Matter Most" (Zondervan) will be released in October 2013.





headline: Obama and Kerry's fingerprints all over Syria crisis
byline: By Anne Bayefsky


In Syria, the motto for stopping the bloodshed might be summed up this way: when the going gets tough, the tough hold a conference. 

That’s the latest word from Secretary John Kerry and his Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov who are planning the event for some time in June.

Neither Assad, nor the opposition, has committed to attend.

Meanwhile, the United Nations General Assembly President Vuc Jeremić raised the number of dead on May 15 to “at least 80,000 people, most civilians.” Syrian NGOs this week put the figure at more than 94,000.

With the Assad regime busy adding to the death toll, and rebels recently releasing a video of one of their own cutting out and then eating the heart of a Syrian soldier, the unfortunate reality is that good guys are few and far between. 

Cannibalism versus mass murder appears to leave poor President Obama in a quandary not of his own making. But the reality is that it is the president who has repeatedly miscalculated on the Arab “spring” and who early on emboldened President Assad.

Get serious about Iran and its client states and terror satellites will feel the blow.

Obama sent a U.S. Ambassador to Syria for the first time in six years with no promise of reform in return. Obama’s Secretary of State gave traction to the claim that Assad was “a reformer.”

Closely interconnected to Assad’s bloody calculation is the administration’s dithering on Iran. The Iranians don’t see the downside from backing Assad, just as they don’t fear anything from President Obama except more hot air. 

The “door is still open” but the “window is closing” routine is by now a standing joke. 

In April at his first Senate Committee on Foreign Relations hearing following his confirmation, Kerry analogized the Iranian and American election processes and said we couldn’t possibly do anything on Iran until their June so-called “elections” had played themselves out.

Similarly, the administration’s bungling of America’s relationship with Russia has also licensed Assad. Kerry was in Russia on May 7, 2013 talking a Syrian conference at the same time that the Russians were giving the green light to sell Syria advanced ground-to-air missile systems.

So, yes, it’s now all so complicated. 

Syrian forces use chemical weapons on their own people. On May 5, 2013, a UN Syria inquiry official said there was strong evidence that Syrian rebels have used chemical weapons.

Assad launches more attacks on civilians. Last week Syrian rebels again kidnapped UN peacekeepers.

Assad is revving up Palestinian terrorists, long harbored in Damascus, to attack Israel. Al Qaeda finger prints are clearly visible among the Syrian opposition.

And then there’s the impotent United Nations. Security Council action is stymied by the Russian veto. So on Wednesay, the General Assembly adopted a resolution introduced by Qatar. The vote was 107 for, 12 against and 59 abstentions – that’s barely half in favor of coming down hard on Assad. The accompanying UN press release opens with this: “the General Assembly took action…” Action, UN-style. 

Secretary Kerry says the forthcoming conference will be driven by an agenda which does not call for Assad’s ouster but lets the parties decide on transitional players “by mutual consent” – notwithstanding they can’t agree on anything else.

Americans are genuinely concerned by the horrific human rights violations in Syria but are not interested in installing and promoting one more anti-American and anti-Israel Arab government at their expense. 

The Obama administration has made a mess of it, in large measure by taking its eye off the Iranian ball. Get serious about Iran and its client states and terror satellites will feel the blow.





headline: What if laws applied to everyone?
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


What if government officials have written laws that apply only to us and not to them? What if we gave them the power to protect our freedoms and our safety and they used that power to trick and trap some of us? What if government officials broke the laws we hired them to enforce? What if they prosecuted others for breaking the same laws they broke?

What if the government enacted a law making it a crime to provide material assistance to terrorist organizations? What if that law was intended to stop people from giving cash and weapons to organizations that bomb and maim and kill? What if the government looked at that law and claimed it applied to a dentist or a shopkeeper who sold services or goods to a terrorist organization, and not just to financiers and bomb makers?

What if an organization that killed also owned a hospital or a school and the law made it a crime to contribute to the hospital or the school? What if the Supreme Court ruled that the law is so broad that it covers backslapping, advocacy and free speech? What if the court ruled that the law makes it a crime to encourage any terrorist organization to do anything -- fix teeth, educate children, save lives or kill people? What if the law makes it a crime to talk to any person known to be a terrorist? What if the law is so broad that it punishes ideas and the free expression of those ideas, even if no one is harmed thereby?

What if it is a crime to backslap terror fighters and to encourage their terrorist-affiliated organizations to fight, except if the backslapper is an FBI agent or a senator?

What if FBI agents pretended to be members of these terrorist organizations and set out to find people in America who were willing to join? What if the people they found really did want to join a real terrorist organization, but the organizations were located in the Middle East? What if the FBI offered plane tickets and cash to the people they found who said they were interested in joining these groups?

What if FBI agents actually encouraged these people to fly to the Middle East and take up arms in a violent civil war? What if the FBI arrested the people it found and encouraged just as they were about to leave the U.S. and then charged them with providing material assistance to terrorist organizations? What if the president boasted that in his mind these duped dopes were really terrorists and their arrests kept us all safer? What if no material assistance had in fact ever been supplied by those dopes to any terrorist organization?

What if the very members of Congress who voted for this law that prohibits providing material assistance to terrorists by deed or word went and visited people in the Middle East who were fighting a violent civil war? What if these members of Congress concluded that the warriors they visited were good because their adversaries were evil? What if, during a visit, one senator was actually photographed with two Al Qaeda-affiliated leaders? What if that was confirmed on national television by the Bush administration ambassador to the United Nations? What if that senator was furious at the former ambassador and insisted that he had not met with Al Qaeda?

What if that senator encouraged whoever he met with to wage a war of terror on the government of the country they were trying to control? What if that senator insisted that the warriors with whom he met were good warriors because the government they were fighting was evil?

What if the government prosecuted the dopes whom the FBI duped just because it wanted to boast that it caught them? What if the FBI agents who tricked and trapped these dopes encouraged them to join terrorist groups? What if the FBI agents who tricked and trapped these dopes encouraged them to provide material assistance to terrorist-affiliated organizations in the Middle East? What if the senator that the former ambassador exposed offered to get the U.S. government to provide material assistance to terrorist-affiliated organizations? What if he did the same in Libya a few years ago and that brought anarchy to our former ally? What if our own ambassador to Libya was killed by a terrorist group because there was no effective government there to protect him?

What if it is a crime to backslap terror fighters and to encourage their terrorist-affiliated organizations to fight, except if the backslapper is an FBI agent or a senator? What if these terror-fought wars are simply not in the best interests of the American people? What if the backslappers love war because it makes the government stronger? What if the backslappers love war because it is easier to raise taxes, regulate behavior and acquire power for the government when wars are being fought? What if the backslappers are worried that the military might atrophy if it goes a long time without fighting?

What if offensive wars are illegal and morally wrong? What if killing is evil when not done in self-defense? What if those who kill not in self-defense are prosecuted and punished, except when they do so in large numbers and to the sounds of trumpets blaring? What do we do about a government that breaks the laws we have hired it to enforce?





headline: The simple case for hiring veterans
byline: By Karen Ross


As my company spearheads software training for veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan, I am asked, “What can veterans offer a company?”

There are many answers.

Veterans can handle themselves in a myriad of environments. They are professional, and accustomed to working in a team setting.

Vets have leadership capabilities that can effortlessly transfer over to the civilian workplace.

But if this is all true, why does the unemployment rate for returning heroes hover around 30%?

We’re not blind to the damage the sluggish economy has done to millions of working Americans. We have lost a lot of jobs to foreign markets via off-shoring. Civilians are surrounded by this, and other bad news, on a daily basis.

Hiring a veteran gives you a natural-born problem solver, who is most concerned with the ‘mission’—the goal that the employer has set out to achieve..

But veterans, fresh from deployment, have been out of the loop. Service members who have spent the last year of their life far away from home may find themselves out of touch with the job market when they finally return.

They don’t know what employers are looking for, which job skills in which markets are in demand and which ones are flooded.

When asked, many veterans are not able to translate their service occupation into a civilian resume.

With dozens of organizations pitching in to help out-of-work veterans, one would think that every corporation would be putting their best foot forward. Some of these efforts, however, are in vain.

Veterans have high turnover rates when they finally do land a job, and the ugly reality of post-service health concerns—such as PTSD—blanket these warriors with a heavy stigma.

So what do vets have to offer employers looking for talent? The answer is plenty—more than anyone realizes.

I’ll use the team we trained at my company as an example. The first component of our ‘boot camp’ integrates basic computer savvy with more professional-level software analysis.

As the group started to move towards highly specialized material, they produced a series of virtual notecards to assist future training cycles with the subject matter that was most difficult to grasp. These ‘flashcards’ are very similar to ones used by troops studying for promotion within military ranks.

This was not part of the curriculum. Creating the flashcards, overseeing their application in the training process, this all was something the team did on their own.

They collaborated with one another and produced study materials to aid our trainees in the months and years to come, taking into account that not all of the trainees have the same learning curve.

Our trainees come from different services, with backgrounds ranging from infantry to logistics to military police.

This is the case for hiring veterans. They can see things other employees cannot (or things others would refuse to see.)

Hiring a veteran gives you a natural-born problem solver, who is most concerned with the ‘mission’—the goal that the employer has set out to achieve.

That person will take whatever route is open to them for success without anyone ‘telling them’ to do it. They are not afraid to challenge the status quo. And perhaps most importantly, these individuals will act with selfless intent.

In a perfect world, the welfare of returning troops would be a top priority. We don’t live in a perfect world.

We as a nation must not lose sight of what these amazing young people have to contribute to society.

What is asked of veterans requires great courage and fortitude. They deserve the strength and support of their citizens in return.





headline: Time to fight the epidemic of online hate
byline: By Abraham H. Foxman, Christopher Wolf


Several women’s advocates recently put the spotlight on misogynistic postings to Facebook promoting and celebrating violent attacks on women. As a result of their pressure on advertisers and others, Facebook eventually responded -- admitting it could do better in policing online hate and outlining a series of steps that it planned to take to address hate speech.

That episode reflected a slice of a problem we have worked on for years -- an epidemic of online hate that is harming individuals and society. Today, the virus of Internet hate is metastasizing every day in ways that Hitler and his propagandists never could have imagined. 

This scourge of online bigotry and its consequences are the subject of our new book, “Viral Hate,” which proffers an overview of the problem and looks to Internet providers, governments and society at large for creative new solutions.

Our book does not make the case for stifling free speech, nor is it an attempt to cast aspersions on the Internet itself for the problem. In fact, we celebrate and defend this wonderful tool for information-sharing, research and social networking, and conclude that one solution to the problem of online hate may be more speech, not less.

Some simply shrug off online hate as the inevitable effluent of Internet freedom and rationalize it as a problem too big to address. After all, every second on the Internet, there are more than 700 posts to Facebook, and 600 Twitter tweets. Every 72 hours of video are posted to YouTube. 

Much of this content is harmless, and yet a disturbing amount of online content is anti-Semitic, racist, homophobic and misogynistic. It can overwhelm sites in seconds. Recently, YouTube was flooded with racist comments after an otherwise harmless cereal advertisement featuring a bi-racial child, her white mom and black dad went viral. The video site was forced to shut down the comments section until they had found way to stop the flood of racist invective from poisoning the discussion.

Hate has indeed gone viral.

Online hate traumatizes its targets. It also serves to rally and attract others who might share its bigoted message. 

Hateful ideas have led some people to take action offline, in the real world. There have been widely reported attacks minorities and suicides that started with Internet hate speech or online bullying.

What is more, while the Internet is a terrific tool for gathering research, there are many instances where young children have turned to the Internet for a homework assignment and found themselves confronted with false “historical information,” such as racist sites purporting to tell the “true story” of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. or Holocaust denial sites masquerading as purveyors of truth.

Also disturbing is that many people react to the common appearance of online hate by treating it as the norm, and ignoring it.

The problem of scale -- the sheer volume of Internet content -- is no excuse for not trying to deal with online hate. When viruses causing disease spread, society responds even when the scale of the problem is daunting. Likewise, the virus of hate requires a broad response. 

Internet hosts like Facebook and Google have joined with the Inter-Parliamentary Coalition for Combating Anti-Semitism and the Anti-Defamation League in a working group that includes civil rights experts for an ongoing collaboration on ways to reduce hate speech. Terms of Service and their enforcement, tools for counter-speech as an antidote for hate speech, and education are the current focus. 

All the while, the right to free expression always is in mind. And yet, more is greatly needed from the Internet community, especially the companies that knowingly or unknowingly play host to hateful content.

For starters, the companies need to learn why some content it is hosting -- like Holocaust denial -- is indeed hate speech, as are jokes using anti-gay epithets. And they need to put adequate resources in place to respond to complaints about the presence of hate-filled posts, and to take down those posts promptly. 

And more is needed from parents and educators. Teaching kids about cyber-literacy and online civility is a start, and we do a woefully bad job of that in this country.

And as demonstrated by the women pushing Facebook to change, people who use the Internet need to speak up when they see online hate. “When you see something, say something” should not be restricted to unattended parcels. We each have a duty to speak out against online hate.

Edmund Burke’s pre-Internet warning still applies: "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing."





headline: Does Oklahoma natural disaster prove there is no God?
byline: By Rice Broocks


Tragedy in Oklahoma: tornadoes devastate a community, an elementary school is leveled and the death toll stands at 24 dead.

Does the idea of the existence of a loving God get swept away in the wake of such storms like a tin building or mobile home?

Looking at the outpouring of prayer and the massive faith-based response to help those affected, it doesn't seem to be the case. In fact, it appears to be just the opposite. I've lost count of the times I’ve read or heard the phrase, "Our thoughts and prayers are with the people of OKC."

Still for some, the call for prayers for the victims and their families seems almost irrational. They say, "If prayer didn't work before the storm to prevent it, why should we think it would work after the damage is done?"

The recurring story is that when tragedy strikes, God shows up through the lives of countless thousands whose faith moves them to action.

In moments like these, we have little time to waste asking questions like "why did this happen?" The urgent need of the hour is to give our collective focus and efforts toward those who are hurting and are in need.

That’s where the practical side of prayer is clearly seen: It turns our focus and our faith towards the ones who need our help. Once this happens, that faith compels us to act. That faith compels us to do something...anything to help those affected.

The recurring story in this country is that when tragedy strikes, God shows up through the lives of countless thousands whose faith moves them to action--to give their time and resources to help the hurting.

Besides the tragic reports, there will be stories of hope that abound as well. Stories of not only the massive numbers that were spared or recovered in the rubble, but the inexplicable comfort those families most affected will experience.

With little time to waste in mere speculation of God’s goodness and existence, we must remember some important things, lest in our pain we wrongly conclude that turning to God for help is a futile exercise.

It's self evident that our world runs by natural laws and processes. Wind currents, thunderstorms, pressure and temperature changes all contribute to form things like tornadoes and hurricanes. Without tectonic plate movement (which results in earthquakes), life on earth would not be possible.

Is the creator of the car, a cruel and thoughtless person because of the millions of people that have died in auto accidents?

Those natural laws affect everyone, believers and non-believers alike. In reality, this world we inhabit is a pale blue dot of hope in the midst of a violent, hostile universe.

The existence of life, consciousness and reason in the midst of this vast, uncaring universe is the wonder of wonders. The fact that we are learning to protect ourselves from these natural forces is the result of these gifts.

We'll never know on this side of eternity how many prayers were answered and lives spared as a result of God's mercy, or how many prayers made a difference.

Besides creating a world run by natural laws, which can be understood and harnessed, God made humans with the capacity to choose good or evil, knowing many would choose the latter, which gives insight into the atrocities committed in Boston or Newtown, Conn.

Yet, God took things a step farther. He wrote Himself into the script of this cosmic drama. He became a man in Jesus Christ and felt the sufferings of the entire world. He also demonstrated who He was by subduing the forces of nature, calming storms and ultimately defying death itself.

When we pray, we are engaging our Creator and asking for His help. Just as there are natural laws, there are spiritual laws as well, and prayer seems to be one of them. Rather than turn from God in dark times, we turn to Him because we know that there must be an ultimate source of comfort and strength to tap into.

Skeptics use moments like this to mock and ridicule people of faith for their prayers. Yet, this doesn't take away the pain, it just takes away the hope.

Faith is what will help those who have lost loved ones move forward and believe that something good can come out of something so tragic. It is also a vital tool that will help a city rebuild stronger and more compassionate than ever before.





headline: Is college worth it?
byline: By William J. Bennett, David Wilezol


Generations of Americans have been told that getting a bachelor’s degree is the key to a relatively prosperous life. But recently the news has been filled with stories of the financial hardships college graduates today are facing.

Borrowers defaulted on $3.5 billion in student loans during the first three months of 2013 alone, and the Federal Reserve has estimated that the current nationwide amount of student debt is over $1 trillion.

Meanwhile, a college education has become one of the most expensive products in America. The cost of college has increased 1,120 percent in the last 30 years, far outpacing inflation. In light of all this, we have asked the question, “Is College Worth It?” The answer is, “It depends.”

The cost of college has increased 1,120 percent in the last 30 years, far outpacing inflation.

One study conducted last year found that approximately 50 percent of the class of 2011 was either unemployed or underemployed. As a result, many recent graduates are putting off getting married, starting families and buying homes.

Colleges are disappointing their students in other ways as well.

One study showed that only 45 percent of college graduates made substantial gains in critical thinking, complex reasoning and writing skills in their first two years of school.

Too often, unchallenging or novelty academics, such as courses on Lady Gaga, have replaced rigorous learning in the traditional liberal arts and STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) disciplines.

Additionally, most college campuses have an unabashedly liberal political orientation, and are rife with binge drinking, illegal drug use and the degrading quothook-upquot culture.

Before deciding whether or not college is the right choice, it is important to make an honest assessment of a student’s ability and inclination to do college-level work.

If a student has real doubts about whether he can commit to four years of papers, tests and class time, he shouldn’t go.

He also shouldn’t go just because everyone else is going, or because his primary motivation is to be part of the party scene.

Many students with these mindsets find themselves part of the roughly 46 percent of students who do not graduate within six years.

Secondly, it is important for students to consider the probable financial impact of their course of study. Payscale.com, a website that collects data on the workforce, has shown that STEM jobs pay the most money, and have the highest rates of employment.

Employers desire the hard skills that a computer programmer, petroleum engineer or radiologist can offer.

Conversely, the skills that a psychology, English or political science major might have are not as in demand, and usually pay less.

It might be worth it to borrow more money to study a financially lucrative major than one that is (probably) less so. Did you know that the average new graduate of the South Dakota School of Mines Technology earns more money out of school than the average recent Harvard grad?

Lastly, it does still matter – at least a bit – where you go. Graduates from Princeton, Stanford, the University of Michigan and other top-tier schools have a higher average salary than graduates of other schools because their “brand” is synonymous with quality.

If a student can get into a highly ranked school, it is probably worth it to go there, even if she has to borrow money. But the student still must make a wise decision about how much it will cost and what she will study.

Many young people wrongly feel that without a B.A., they have no hope of landing a good job in the modern economy.

The truth is that by 2018 there will be 14 million jobs that will require more than a high school diploma but less than a bachelor’s degree. Many of these jobs pay good, middle-class wages: nurses, air traffic controllers and IT professionals.

Additionally, America is currently facing a deficit of 3 million skilled-labor jobs – professions like welders, electricians and plumbers that earn good money and can never be shipped overseas.

A recovery of vocational-technical education could be a game-changer in meeting the needs of many students who find the educational system does not meet their particular needs.

Ultimately, a college education can still be a good investment, but it is not necessarily the right choice for everyone.

Students need to make smart decisions about their capacity for academic work, the job prospects for their major, and how they will pay for their education.

Students should make sure it’s really worth it based on their interests and life goals before taking the plunge.



William J. Bennett is the author of “Is College Worth It: A Former United States Secretary of Education and a Liberal Arts Graduate Expose the Broken Promise of Higher Education.” He was U.S. secretary of education from 1985 to 1988 and director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy under President George H.W. Bush.





headline: Should judge jail FoxNews.com reporter if she declines to reveal her sources?
headline: Carney hit by 46 questions on Benghazi, IRS scandals
byline: By Dan Gainor


Most people are happy to declare “Thank God it’s Friday.” On Friday May 10, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney was not one of them. Carney got a “case of the Mondays” a few days early as the Obama administration's lies about Benghazi and potentially criminal acts at the IRS all caught up with them at once.

ABC Senior White House correspondent Jonathan Karl started the day off revealing that the famous Benghazi talking points were “dramatically edited by the administration” a total of 12 different times. Those changes included the removal of all references to Al Qaeda initially approved by the CIA.

That public relations disaster was followed by another later in the day. The IRS admitted that conservatives had been right all along and that right-wing groups had indeed been targeted by the IRS. In true Nixonian language, the IRS admitted “mistakes were made,” but denied they were political, convincing absolutely no one.

Fridays, famously called “take out the trash day” in the lefty TV show “West Wing,” are supposed to be days when the administration hides news. On May 10, the trash bin was overflowing and even the press noticed. Carney couldn’t dump garbage fast enough. He fielded at least 38 questions on Benghazi and another eight on the possible crimes at the IRS.

Throughout, he dodged, weaved and blamed – especially blamed. He blamed former President George W. Bush, the CIA, the IRS, Congress, Mitt Romney and, of course, Republicans. “Congress” got blamed 28 times and Republicans got mentioned 20 times by Carney as he tried to spin his way out of trouble.

He began by reminding the press that the White House did “have a background briefing” earlier for 14 news organizations. That meeting, held following these types of PR disasters, had to be spinning like a carnival ride. And the spinning had just gotten started.

The IRS questions were easier since even Carney admitted he wasn’t in the know. He stressed “two things” to pass the buck – that the IRS was an “independent enforcement agency” and “the individual who was running the IRS at the time was actually an appointee from the previous administration.” In other words, blame Bush. I think he learned that one from his boss.

When it came to Benghazi, Carney claimed the White House made a “non-substantive factual correction” to the talking points. He continued: “I must say that all of this information was provided months ago to members of Congress,” adding sarcastically, “which they have leaked now to reporters.” This, after the White House just had a background meeting with 14 different news organizations so they could leak, er, give background information

At several points, Carney embraced his inner Candy Crowley and claimed, inaccurately, that Obama had called the attack “an act of terror” during his Rose Garden speech. (Kudos to Tim Carney for that catch.) However, that’s completely untrue. Even CBS News admitted in 2012 that the transcript “shows that the president did refer to ‘acts of terror’ – but not specifically in reference to the Libya attack. Instead, he made a broader statement about American defiance.” The Team Obama shorthand has created a fictional narrative that is largely accepted by the media.

During the briefing, question after question pounded Carney on his previous comments that only “stylistic” changes had been made to the Benghazi talking points, when that obviously was not true.

The questioning grew heated and it appeared to show on Carney, as first his ears and then his face reddened to the point where people on Twitter were mocking it. Twitchy captured some of the more fun comments including one saying he was trying to “defend the indefensible.” That was an understatement.

Hilariously, Carney made multiple positive references to the famous interview of UN Ambassador Susan Rice where she made the bogus comments about the “heinous and offensive” video about Islam.

It took 37 minutes into the press conference for one of the reporters to ask a question that didn’t involve one of the day’s two big scandals. Carney seemed to breathe a sigh of relief when it happened.

But it wasn’t over. One of the later questions was telling. “Don’t this series of e-mails now I suggest that your discussion of the video was speculative. You were cherry picking,” asked one reporter. Others pointed out a key flaw in Carney’s defense, calling him out for saying the talking points were what we were sure we knew, but reminding him that the initial talking points said the CIA wrote “we do know that Islamic extremists with ties to al-Qa’ida participated in the attack.” Carney’s response was to direct that inquiry to the “intelligence community.”

If the questioning was a true sign of media interest, Carney can look for many more red-faced press briefings. Perhaps he needs more make-up next time. He should try cover-up. It’s perfect.

Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Why the 'five laws of decline' are behind IRS, Benghazi scandals
byline: By Oliver DeMille, Orrin Woodward


Americans are both outraged and energized over headlines highlighting scandals in Washington related to the Benghazi tragedy and the IRS targeting of conservative groups. But there is a bigger concern at play in these events and it's something very few people are talking about although it underpins and links the two scandals together.

What we have identified as the “Five laws of decline” are creating systemic problems that are eroding our government and other institutions.

These five systemic problems, which include increased quantity leads to decreased quality, aren’t going to be fixed by Congressional hearings, or even heads rolling at at the Internal Revenue Service. Even if State Department, IRS, White House and other officials are held fully accountable for whatever went wrong, these five laws of decline will remain in force—and such crises will continue.

The Constitution provides judicial and congressional checks on the executive branch, but they are only belatedly and timidly used anymore.

For example, just one of these systemic laws of decline is directly responsible for the IRS and Benghazi scandals. 

President Obama inadvertently hinted at this problem when he vowed to hold the Internal Revenue Service accountable if reports of political targeting are proven true:
"Because the IRS as an independent agency requires absolute integrity, and people have to have confidence that they're ... applying the laws in a non-partisan way."

This quote points to a root problem. The president said that the IRS “requires absolute integrity.” This is the opposite of the American Founders view.

The framers valued integrity, but they built the Constitution to work even if the leaders had no integrity—especially in such cases, in fact.

James Madison famously said that since men aren’t angels, all government officials and agencies must be vigorously checked and balanced.

Only effective checks (not hopes of official integrity), keep government in line. The White House seems to have believed that the level of integrity from government officials at the IRS, State Department and other agencies would be enough (it is doubtful they would have afforded such trust to business leaders or taxpayers).

Nor is this a partisan issue. The current scandals seem all too familiar to those who watched the Bush White House promise that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and target key Democratic state attorneys general for unwarranted investigations.

Same story, different actors.

Executive overreach is endemic in Washington, regardless of which party is in power.

There are, put simply, too few effective checks on the sprawling executive branch with all its programs, funding, institutions and agencies. As long as they aren’t checked, we’re going to see more abuses and scandals.

The Constitution provides judicial and congressional checks on the executive branch, but they are only belatedly and timidly used anymore.

In the case of the IRS and Benghazi, it was the media that checked the Executive branch. On the one hand: good for the media. Quality journalism should be a check on government arrogance and abusive secrecy. But a functional free government can only last if its branches effectively check each other.

This isn’t so much a “conservative vs. liberal” problem as a “Washington vs. America” issue. Washington is systemically dysfunctional, the people want real progress, and partisan politics can’t provide effective solutions because the executive branch isn’t adequately checked.

Real change is going to require a new look at checks and balances, and the only real checks include a check on an agency’s ability to spend.

Even if conservatives win the day on these two scandals—if Congress fires or fines those responsible for IRS targeting and Benghazi, and sets up a system where this can never happen again (and that’s a pretty big “if”)—we’ll continue to see these kinds of crises and scandals until we understand the systemic causes and start addressing the real, underlying problems.



Oliver DeMille is co-author of "LeaderShift: A Call for Americans to Finally Stand Up and Lead" (Business Plus)





headline: The five best, worst things in the Senate's immigration bill
byline: By Pramila Jayapal


I’ve spent a decade working as an advocate for immigration reform. Finally, we’ve got a real bill to work with. 

This month, a bipartisan group of Senators released an 844-page immigration proposal that goes a long way to fixing our current failed system. Changing demographics and politics pushed the process forward. 

America has always been a country that values fairness, hard work and creativity. We’ve integrated waves of immigrants over the centuries and, together, built a stronger country. 

It’s that moment again to recognize the contributions of immigrants and to make sure we have an immigration process that reflects our American values.

There’s still a long way to go before we reach the finish line for immigration reform and we need fixes to the proposed bill to make it right for today’s America. Here’s my list of the five best and five worst things in the bill.

The Best

1. It’s bipartisan. That’s a great start to securing the necessary votes in the Senate, and putting pressure on House colleagues to pass a similar bill. 

2. There’s a path. Most undocumented immigrants, who formerly had absolutely no way to become legalized will now have the opportunity to become “registered provisional immigrants” and get on a path to permanent residence and eventual citizenship. DREAMers and agriculture workers get a speedier path to citizenship, too.

3. The family immigration “backlog” will be cleared. The current backlog of 4.7 million U.S. citizens or permanent residents who have applied for their family members to come to the United States will be processed over the course of eight years, with a certain number of applications guaranteed to be processed each year. It’s high-time families get to be with their loved ones.

4. Women matter. Throughout the bill, women do get attention. The definition of employment appears to recognize the work of stay-at-home mom and other caregivers, working moms, and domestic workers. Spouses of applicants for citizenship will be included and will also be able to petition for themselves in cases of divorce, domestic violence or death of the primary applicant. Visas for victims of domestic violence will almost double. There’s more that needs to happen, but this is a great start.

5. The bill establishes the first ever federal Office of Immigrant Integration. Instead of a host of decentralized state efforts, we can now coordinate, direct and fund integration efforts from a central place. 

The Worst

1. The path is long and still excludes many. Undocumented immigrants will have to wait thirteen years to get their citizenship, which is a long time to be in limbo. The sooner people know they are here to stay, the sooner they can fully contribute their skills and talents to America. 

The bill also sets a cut off date for qualifying at 12/31/2011, leaving anyone who arrived since then in limbo. Some of the requirements—from the fees, to the renewal process after the first six year period, to the continuous employment requirements—could leave out millions of people. 

Reform that leaves out millions will not be reform—and we’ll end up dealing with the same issue all over again in a few years. That’s not good for anyone. We need fixes now.

2. The proposed shift to a purely merit-based system is bad for family values. A point system that rewards higher levels of education and employment doesn’t recognize—as America always has—that our country is strongest when families are strong.

3. We’re still spending too much money on borders and fences. Spending more doesn’t help get real security—that comes when we have a common-sense immigration system that that meets our economic needs and our values. 

4. Discrimination against women in future employment visa categories still hasn’t been fully addressed. Right now, only 27% of all employment visas go to women.

Future immigration flows need to give equal value to the work that women do in essential industries like domestic work and in-home health care. While the bill, assigns points for “caregiving,” it’s unclear if this will be enough for meaningful inclusion of women.

5. We’re past time. It’s good that Senators on both sides of the aisle are recognizing the need to get this done but we’re about a decade late. So let’s get it done now.

In the end, it’s critical that we recognize that millions of immigrants are here, working to contribute to America and to make life better for their families. This bill is the start to a real solution that honors those important American values and reminds us that we truly are one America. 





headline: What the rise of the breadwinner mom really means for America's families
byline: By Suzanne Venker


A new study from the Pew Social Demographic Trends Project finds that working mothers, considered by many to be a boon for society, have become primary breadwinners in a record 40 percent of American households with children—up from 11 percent in 1960. To call that dramatic would be an understatement.

This trend is, of course, a direct result of women’s higher rates of education and labor force participation. Today, more women than men hold bachelor’s degrees; and women make up nearly half the American workforce. It’s all quite impressive.

But for every gain, there is a loss.

The vast majority of breadwinner moms are single mothers. That’s hardly a step in the right direction.

Though we’re loathe to admit it we know that as long as both parents are absent children will suffer the consequences.

Despite its widespread social acceptance of single mothers, children who grow up without fathers suffer a host of social, emotional and psychological problems: crime, drugs, promiscuity, teen pregnancy, suicide, and dropouts. That’s not to say single mothers aren’t doing their best; it’s merely to say there’s only so much they can do.

But single motherhood is only part of the story.

There’s another group of breadwinner moms on the rise: married ones. “Among all U.S. households with children, the share of married breadwinner moms has jumped from 4 percent in 1960 to 15 percent in 2011,” writes the Associated Press' Hope Yen.

That mothers, single or otherwise, have become the top earners in 4 in 10 U.S. households is part of the “dramatic transformation we’ve seen in family structure and family dynamics over the past 50 years or so,” said Kim Parker, associate director of the Pew Social Demographic Trends Project. “Women's roles have changed, marriage rates have declined—the family looks a lot different than it used to.”

Indeed it does. The question is, is this a good thing or a bad thing?

That is where Americans are divided.

On one side of the debate, people point to economics as the reason parents can’t be home with their kids. But the issue is bigger than that. Ultimately, it’s about how to reconcile our conflicting views of women’s roles with what we know is best for children and families. We know we can’t return to "Ozzie and Harriet." But we also know something huge has been lost.

And our ambivalence shows.

According to Pew, roughly 79 percent of Americans reject the notion that women should return to their traditional roles. Yet a mere 21 percent of those polled said the trend of more mothers of young children working outside the home is a good thing.

Indeed, the majority of Americans—45% of women and 57% of men—say children are “better off if their mother is at home.” These findings are commensurate with results at Public Agenda, a nonpartisan polling organization that’s been tracking this issue for years.

How, then, do we rectify our conflicting beliefs that women who are also mothers shouldn’t return to traditional roles but that children need a mother at home? That is the issue.

Politicians and women’s groups talk endlessly about family-friendly policies and government-mandated parental leave and child care.

They talk of “change” all day long.

But some things in life don’t change, and children’s needs are at the top of the list. Their needs are the same today as they were one hundred years ago.

And somewhere, deep down, we know this. We know that while we’ve thrown out the old model, we’re going to need a new one. We know we need some version of the old to accommodate the new.

That more and more dads are staying home is a promising trend, indeed. It means we’re finally getting it. (Either that, or we’ve been forced to “get it” because jobs are scarce and mom makes more money. Either way, the result is good.)

We also know, though we’re loathe to admit it, that as long as both parents are absent, or simply distracted by their jobs, children will suffer the consequences—regardless of whether the distraction is borne of necessity or choice. All young children know is that their parents aren’t there. Why they’re not there is beside the point.

To be sure, this is a tough pill to swallow for a new generation. But swallow it we must.





headline: Inside the mind of Ariel Castro
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


I have written before that there is no original evil left in the world; everyone is just recycling pain.

Ariel Castro was not born a predator. He became one. 

Based on my nearly two decades as an adult, adolescent and forensic psychiatrist, talking at the level of the soul and the gut about the human psyche with everyone from anxious kids, to abused women, to gang members, to men who have raped and killed, the origin of Castro’s evil is the house of horrors in which he alludes to being raised.

I promise you that what Castro is charged with creating in Cleveland—a “home” where three women were allegedly held in ropes and chains, beaten and raped, where children were either enslaved or aborted—will turn out to be a magnified version (perhaps 2X, perhaps 100X) of the home in which he was raised. There, Casto reportedly maintains in an alleged suicide note which may have been written in 2004 and was found inside his home, that he was emotionally, physically and sexually abused by relatives. 

Ariel Castro’s diagnosis may turn out to be psychopathy, but the real key to understanding him is that he lacked empathy.

Castro’s diagnosis may turn out to be psychopathy, but the real key to understanding him is that he lacked empathy. And once someone no longer can appreciate the pain of others, that person is “free,” in a terrible and terrifying way, to perpetrate horrific acts.

In fact, the torture that a person lives through that crushes his empathy, can be enough to create a house of mirrors, in which one reproduces his own suffering again, and again, and again, like the work of art by M.C. Escher of a hand drawing a hand, never quite being able to escape the dehumanized recreation of his own destruction.

Castro reportedly says as much in his suicide note. He cannot understand his addiction to taking women prisoner and knows, someplace deep inside him—which we may as well think of as the voice of God—that what he is doing is predatory and wrong and hellish. Yet, he cannot stop.

Perhaps, had Castro a little more intelligence or a spiritual guide or had been lucky enough to have been incarcerated early in life and introduced to a gifted prison psychiatrist, he might have noted that he is one of three brothers and took three people hostage. 

He might have noted that he and his brothers are all reportedly psychologically hobbled, chained to pathology of one kind or another (supposedly, including addiction). He might have noted that two of his adult brothers still live with their aging mother, like hulking, disempowered infants, like, one might wonder, prisoners.

You don’t take three women hostage and make them abort repeatedly and beat them and humiliate them and sexually attack them if you have true, loving feelings for your mother. But you might do that, if you deny all your primal, murderous rage toward that woman, because it is too psychologically threatening to feel it at five or six or thirteen or fifty years old, and it ends up erupting out of you—directed at every female you see, including your own wife and daughters.

It is popular to speak of children as resilient. It is a complete and utter myth. Children are exquisitely emotionally sensitive. The seeds of major depression and panic disorder and PTSD and borderline personality disorder and, yes, antisocial (psychopathic) personality disorder are most often sown in childhood and adolescence. And while someone may be born gifted by God with a hardy brain chemistry, with serotonin and norepinephrine and dopamine aplenty, many are not, and are, therefore, even more vulnerable, from birth.

Ariel Castro is no devil. He is no "monster."He’s an abused, ruined decent boy made rancid by psychological dynamics that were once entirely beyond his control. 

Does that mean he has no responsibility to resist the dark forces that developed inside him? No, it does not. 

Do lives sometimes tend unavoidably toward darkness? Yes, they do. What does this imply for justice? That question is part of the human condition. We will debate it, forever. 

I just want to understand. I just want the truth. And I just told you the truth, too. Make of it what you will. Do with it, what you want. But now you know what I know having met men who killed their wives with bats and guns and knives, and women who beat their daughters and raped their sons, and teenagers who preyed viciously on other teenagers. 

Every single case began at least a generation before—and, every time I have looked, more than one generation, and, sometimes, three or four.

I leave you with the words of philosopher Martin Buber and your own life story, to contemplate. Make of his words and your days all you can:

“Love ranges in its effect through the whole world. In the eyes of him who takes his stand in love, and gazes out of it . . . good people and evil people, wise and foolish, beautiful and ugly, become successively real to him; that is . . . they confront him as Thou...Love is the responsibility of an I for a Thou. In this lies the likeliness . . . of all who love, from the smallest to the greatest and from the blessedly protected man, whose life is rounded in that of a loved being, to him who is all his life nailed to a cross of the world, and who ventures to bring himself to the dreadful point—to love all men.”

Only a predator would fail to hate what Ariel Castro did.But only a heartless person would fail to grieve the loss of the potential for goodness he was born with, which was stolen from him, decades ago, in a house of horrors we still know almost nothing about.





headline: Dr. Ben Carson, liberals and the fear of success
byline: By Cal Thomas


There are many successful liberals, so why do so many of them wish to subsidize failure for the poor, instead of showing them how to succeed?

Take Dr. Ben Carson, as one example. Dr. Carson, the renowned neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Md., is enjoying a certain amount of celebrity unrelated to his profession for speaking his mind about how individuals and the nation might succeed if more Americans were less dependent on government.

Dr. Carson, who is African-American, has been denounced as insufficiently black because he won't toe the liberal line when it comes to big government and the implication that those in the African-American voting bloc, huge supporters of the Democratic Party, who fall below the poverty line, cannot succeed without it. The fact that many have not succeeded with government has apparently escaped the notice of his critics.

All whites don't think alike, why should all African-Americans be expected to?

Speaking with Megyn Kelly on Fox News' "America Live" last week, Dr. Carson addressed some of the slurs tossed at him, saying they are what you might expect to hear "on a third grade playground." He appealed to his detractors to "move beyond" such rhetoric "and let's have a real discussion about the real facts. If somebody disagrees, let's talk about why they disagree, let's talk about the pros and cons, let's see if we can find some accommodation."

That is precisely what the left does not want to do, because to have such a discussion would expose liberalism's failure to solve the problems of poverty and education -- to cite just two examples -- through government.

MSNBC's Toure Monday has called Dr. Carson a token "black friend" to the Republican Party. I don't recall Carson ever saying he belongs to the Republican Party, do you? Even so, labels should not define the man. What Carson is saying and what he represents ought to be the beginning point for the discussion he is trying to initiate.

Dr. Carson dismissed one suggestion he might be an "Uncle Tom" this way: "Well, obviously they don't know what an Uncle Tom is because they need to read Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.' You'll see that he was very, very subservient, kind of go along to get along type of person. Obviously, that's not what I'm doing."

Obviously.

In the Kelly interview, Dr. Carson hit his main point about liberal reaction on subjects ranging from ObamaCare to higher taxes: "They feel that if you look a certain way then you have to stay on the plantation."

Isn't such a personal attack also a form of racism? All whites don't think alike, why should all African-Americans be expected to?

If government were the solution and not the problem, shouldn't we expect that the amount of money spent on anti-poverty programs -- $15 trillion since 1964, according to a CATO Institute analysis -- might have moved the needle on poverty? Instead there are nearly as many poor people today as there were 49 years ago. According to the Wall Street Journal, "Enrollment in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, as the modern-day food-stamp benefit is known, has soared 70 percent since 2008 to a record 47.8 million as of December 2012." Government as solution isn't working and Dr. Carson wants to discuss why. For this he is attacked?

The nightmare for liberals would be if Ben Carson became a role model for the poor instead of a target. If more of the poor had mothers like his (and maybe active fathers, which he didn't have), who focused on reading and discipline, more might grow up to be like him. They might reject the lie that they are incapable of succeeding because of their circumstances.

In addition to Carson's remarks about government dependency, he is also under attack for his unorthodox positions on same-sex marriage and evolution, which the National Review Online reports has led to a petition being circulated at Johns Hopkins Medical School asking that he be disinvited as commencement speaker. That would add censorship to racism.

The late newsman David Brinkley said, "A successful man is one who can lay a firm foundation with the bricks others have thrown at him."

By that standard, Dr. Ben Carson is building a mansion.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: After Georgia cheating scandal, could school choice finally be the right answer?
byline: By Cal Thomas


My first question after reading about seven teachers in an Atlanta, Ga., public school accused of altering standardized test scores to make it appear students performed better than they actually did was: How could they!?

The seven were nicknamed "the chosen" and, according to Georgia state investigator Richard Hyde, the less than magnificent seven sat in a locked room without windows, erasing wrong answers and inserting correct ones. It's one thing for a child to cheat on a test; it's quite another for teachers to do it.

Compounding the cheating scandal is that the children in this elementary school are mostly poor and African-American. How are they helped to develop a moral sense, not to mention an academic foundation that will lift them out of poverty, if they get the message that cheating is better than achieving?

Public school children are subject to all manner of manipulation and disservice by people charged with educating them.

According to The New York Times, the scandal goes beyond cheating. Retired district superintendent Beverly L. Hall is among 35 Atlanta educators indicted by a Fulton County grand jury. Dr. Hall was charged with "racketeering, theft, influencing witnesses, conspiracy and making false statements." Hall reportedly earned more than $500,000 in performance bonuses. She faces up to 45 years in prison.

Dr. Hall has received considerable recognition for her achievements, which later turned out to be counterfeit. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan invited her to the White House.

In 2009, The American Association of School Administrators named her Superintendent of the Year.

It was a case of something being too good to check. Who doesn't want to see poor and minority children succeed in school? It appears these teachers cared more about themselves than the children.

Even the reliably liberal and pro-public school columnist Eugene Robinson is disturbed. Writing in The Washington Post, Robinson says, "It is time to acknowledge that the fashionable theory of school reform -- requiring that pay and job security for teachers, principals and administrators depend on their students' standardized test scores -- is at best a well-intentioned mistake, and at worst nothing but a racket."

Robinson quotes Post education reporter Valerie Strauss, who has written that while there have been "dozens" of allegations of cheating around the country, "only Atlanta's has been aggressively and thoroughly investigated." Strauss wrote, "We don't really know" how widespread the problem might be.

Isn't it long past time to find out?

The problem is that a monopoly always protects itself. The teachers' unions and many Democratic politicians, who receive their campaign contributions, oppose school choice, which would improve not only public schools, but also the chances of poor and minority children to have a better life.

The current approach appears to be to keep disadvantaged children in underperforming schools so that underperforming teachers keep their jobs and the politicians they support keep theirs. As long as the monopoly survives, we can expect more cheating and corner-cutting and less real achievement for children who ought to be everyone's first concern.

Instead, as Atlanta would suggest, public school children are subject to all manner of manipulation and disservice by people charged with educating them. Perhaps if parents had the freedom to send their children to a school they believed would offer them a better shot at true success they would fare better. Could school choice be the answer?

Indiana thinks so. Last week, the state's Supreme Court upheld a voucher program that gives poor and middle-class families access to tax dollars to help them pay private school tuition. Parents should decide where their children go to school.

It's not the children who cannot achieve. It's the system that fails them. "Our schools desperately need to be fixed," writes Robinson. "But creating a situation in which teachers are more likely than students to cheat cannot be the right path. ... Students are not widgets. I totally reject the idea that students from underprivileged neighborhoods cannot learn. Of course they can."

Authorities should pursue investigations of alleged cheating by teachers and school administrators. Meanwhile, for this and many other reasons, the school choice movement is gaining strength. It is seen by increasing numbers of Americans as the best way to prevent cheating children out of the decent education they deserve.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: I worked at an abortion clinic like Dr. Gosnell's 'house of horrors'
byline: By Deborah Edge


I looked in the paper and saw a doctor’s office in need of a bilingual receptionist, someone who could schedule appointments for patients – it was perfect for me. I didn’t realize it was an abortion clinic.

I was a Christian but abortion was not at the top of my list of concerns. I thought it was not a great option but really depended upon the woman’s situation. In my desperation, I put my beliefs aside, only worrying about putting food on the table for my three children and one on the way.

As happens with a lot of abortion clinic employees who are hired to do one thing but are recruited into another, my scheduling position evolved into doing work in the lab. “Lab” is where we sorted through the parts of the aborted child to make sure they were all accounted for and nothing was left inside the patient.

I also did counseling and somehow stomached the excuses women had to abort – for many it was because the baby was a girl and they wanted a boy while others it was because of a fetal defect and others because they didn’t want another child. 

I tried to soothe my soul by comforting these women during their abortions.

My conscience bothered me at times and I would secretly try to change the patient's mind during counseling.

One woman came in who was pregnant with twins and already had another child. I just couldn’t counsel her to choose abortion and told her that there are other options. She chose to keep the twins and saw me a couple years later and told me how grateful she was for my advice and that her children were her joy.

As time went by I learned every position in the clinic and the doctor trusted me. However, he was always in a bad mood and rude to patients and employees. He referred to the larger women as cows or whales. I hated how he treated everyone and left but went back because I needed the money.

Although one might say I was used to this type of work, my heart now felt heavier as I watched woman after woman have an abortion.

Looking back, I believe God was working through my conscience, trying to get my attention and wake me up to the horror of what I was doing.

I tried to soothe my soul by comforting these women during their abortions or helping them with rides to the airport or bus and even had a few stay at my home because they had no extra money for hotels.

But I saw more things that made me question why I was working there. I saw the doctor increasing prices for no reason, making pregnancies look larger on the ultra sound to charge more. I saw him charge women for being overweight, on medication by a primary doctor, for having had previous C-sections, for having a tilted uterus, and many other reasons he just made up.

But even worse than lying to the women or dealing with a cranky boss was what I saw during the abortions. I was the doctor’s right hand person in the operating room and just like those employees of Dr. Gosnell, I saw the abortionist puncture the soft spot in the baby’s head or snip its neck if it was delivered alive.

What in the world was I doing there? Where was the teenager who used to take a Bible everywhere she went?

One day a flier was sent to the clinic asking for people to contact a certain pro-life group if they suspected illegal activity at the clinic. I secretly took it home with me, not sure if I would need it at a later date. I considered leaving several times but I had my children and their livelihood to think about.

Eventually, I made a decision to leave and called the number on the flier. That group put me in touch with Abby Johnson, a former Planned Parenthood clinic director who now runs And Then There Were None, a ministry that helps abortion workers leave their jobs.

I do not know where I would be now without Abby’s help. Her organization has kept me financially stable, helped me spiritually and she has personally been a mentor to me.

My days are brighter knowing that I no longer have to witness abortion and the abuse done to the mothers, not to mention all of the illegal activities done in the clinic.

I am now pro-life without exception and have rediscovered my faith since I left. I go to church every week and take my children with me. I have found the grace of forgiveness and healing. I still cannot believe I worked in the abortion industry for so long. I wish I would have left sooner.

It is my hope that abortion workers will see that there are other options besides working in a job that takes lives or helping in a house of horrors, like that of Dr. Gosnell’s. ATTWN and Abby Johnson can help, just like they did for me. My faith was always there, even in the midst of the horrible things I was doing, and I am so glad that God never gave up on me. 





headline: Media blame America for Boston bombings, ignore ties to radical Islam
byline: By Dan Gainor


Comedian George Carlin famously joked about the seven words you couldn’t say on air. Add two more – “Islam” and “Muslim” – but only if you use them in a negative context.

In the week following the terror attack on the Boston Marathon, lefties and their media clones have been desperate to point out the attack had nothing to do with those two scary words.

After all, journalists and pundits have had time to reflect on the bombing – from the safety of their posh offices and not Boston’s crowded hospitals. The brothers were just poor and misunderstood. It can’t be their fault.

The Brothers Tsarnaev have set media tongues a-wagging looking for someone to blame other than Muslims – like Americans. 

Famed newsman Tom Brokaw took up the blame America crusade on Sunday's NBC “Meet the Press,” discussing “motivation” like he was in an entry-level acting class.

Today in American we have a media so obsessed with feeling good about themselves, that America can’t have a conversation about the dangers of radical Islam.

According to Brokaw, we’re to blame. “I think we also have to examine the use of drones that the United States is involved in and – and there are a lot of civilians who are innocently killed in a drone attack in Pakistan, in Afghanistan, and in Iraq.”

Why? American “presumptuousness,” a crime which now merits the death penalty in certain Islamic circles.

The Washington post claimed on Tuesday that “Boston Marathon bombing suspects elude labels.” Oh? How about radical Islamic terrorists? Radical Muslim terrorists?

According to AP, “U.S. officials said Tuesday, adding another piece to the body of evidence they say suggests the two brothers were motivated by an anti-American, radical version of Islam.”

The media felt they knew better.

At MSNBC, they must be hanging gymnastics medals after the contortions it put its staff through.

When MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow asked a Georgetown professor about “some radicalized YouTube clips” on the older brother’s YouTube page, she received a classic response.

Prof. Charles King told her: “Well, and keep in mind that on his, on the elder brother's, Tamerlan's YouTube channel, there are an equal number of rap videos.” When Georgetown professors start commenting on the content of rap videos, it’s fair to say they’re clueless. Or tragically unhip.

Another MSNBC host continued that smokescreen theme, comparing the bombers to famous murderers.

On Tuesday, Alex Wagner said if the brothers had acted alone, “it ends debate regarding whether to try him as an enemy combatant,” wrote Mediaite. “With no ties to foreign terrorist networks, there would be little difference between him and so-called homegrown and lone wolf terrorists including Timothy McVeigh and Ted Kaczynski.” Only neither of those was motivated by a global belief system linked to hundreds or thousands of terror attacks.

Perhaps, instead of being PC, they might address the issue of radical Islam, especially since two Muslim men were just arrested for a Canadian terror plot.

The media are doing law-abiding American Muslims no favors by refusing to acknowledge a problem – radical Islam – that threatens them as well. But note the term, “radical Islam.”

It is not being overly PC to admit that millions of American Muslims don’t go blowing up their neighbors. Since I have Muslim neighbors, I appreciate that fact.

On Monday, Politico’s Josh Gerstein claimed that “the Boston Marathon bombing suspects’ geopolitical leanings are still largely a mystery.”

He clearly didn’t watch a week filled with news where we learned the older of the Tsarnaev brothers had visited Russia’s terrorist-filled Dagestan. And that Russia had asked the U.S. to investigate his ties to radical Islam. Oopsie.

One of The Atlantic’s “reporters” even did her best to minimize the skill of the terrorists to downplay the attack. “The more we learn of Boston bombers the more they seem like bumblers. And there's the rub: any idiot can terrorize, doesn't require genius,” tweeted Garance Franke-Ruta Tuesday.

Boston health authorities say 264 people were treated at local hospitals, along three killed.

Evil? Yes! Bumblers? Hardly.

Then there were those who couldn’t let that old crisis go to waste. So they used a terror attack on Americans to promote...gun control. New Yorker editor David Remnick told the “Charlie Rose” show that guns were part of the problem.

“We see yet another act which might have been a Hell of a lot more difficult to pull off with effective gun control.” Remnick is a Pulitzer Prize winner. Unsurprisingly, he didn’t get it in logic.

Even my friend, lefty radio host Thom Hartmann used the bombing to attack “all forms of religious fundamentalism that lead to violence.” Thom, like most liberals, isn’t especially tolerant of religion and said this was “a good opportunity for us to have a conversation about modernity versus Bronze Age gods.” Nothing says open-mindedness like calling Christianity “Bronze Age gods.”

What it all adds up to, is a media so obsessed with feeling good about themselves, that America can’t have a conversation about the dangers of radical Islam. It’s a world tailor made for people like nutty columnist David Sirota (OK, that’s like saying “wet ocean”). Sirota, you’ll recall, hoped that the bombers might be “a white American.”

As it turns out, it didn’t matter. The media just report what they want anyhow.



Dan Gainor is the Boone Pickens Fellow and the Media Research Center’s Vice President for Business and Culture. He writes frequently about media for Fox News Opinion. He can also be contacted on Facebook and Twitter as dangainor.



headline: Budget banquet needs some humble pie
byline: By John Stossel


The Senate did something this past weekend it hasn’t done in four years: passed a budget. The law requires the Senate to pass a budget, but Congress often ignores its own laws. For most of Barack Obama’s presidency, a series of continuing resolutions kept the money -- your money -- flowing. Now the Senate wants to add a trillion dollars of new taxes, even more than President Obama seeks. Despite our growing debt, the Senate wants to fund things like the Senate barbershop, which loses a third of a million dollars every year.

It’s like they live in a private bubble.

Politicians say, “I’m going to Washington to serve others.” Maybe they mean to. But after most “serve,” they never leave. When I visit Washington, I see politicians and bureaucrats serving themselves.

As long as Washington spends other people’s money, there will be little incentive for them to be prudent -- or humble.

When the housing bubble burst, home prices dropped in most of America, but not in Washington. Our capital feeds off federal spending, and politicians won’t allow that bubble to burst.

One result is that, today, for the first time, most of America’s richest counties are in the Washington area. About 43 percent of “the 1 percent” -- the top earners leftists say they hate -- now live in 14 counties that surround the District of Columbia.

Nick Sorrentino, creator of AgainstCronyCapitalism.org, notes that average total compensation for a federal employee is now about $120,000, and the gap between government pay and private pay has been growing.

It’s not that Washingtonians are smarter or more productive than the rest of us. It’s that as government grows, more money flows to lobbyists, trade groups and others who live close to those who pass out your money. Government is a parasite -- but a parasite that helps its friends. The way people get rich in Washington is not by inventing things, but by being good at schmoozing and manipulating the bureaucrats who control your money.

Tourists visit Washington and admire the beautiful buildings. All that marble once made me feel patriotic, too, but now I get angry.

Unions claim workers are “under”-paid. But today’s union headquarters resemble palaces. The biggest teachers union, the National Education Association, built a $100 million Washington headquarters that it calls “an environmental oasis.” The AFL-CIO’s beautiful lobby features a giant mosaic made of marble, glass and gold. When I tried to take pictures, so TV viewers could see the elegance, I was told to leave.

Government buildings are grand, too, even new ones like the Reagan office building. “It’s very much like Versailles before the French Revolution,” says historian John Steele Gordon. Washingtonians have become like the French nobility, who spent their lives in the palace at Versailles “and didn’t know much about what went on outside that world.”

“But the real royalty is not in Washington, D.C.,” Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Fla., tells me. “It’s on Wall Street.”

It’s true that there’s more wealth on Wall Street, but Gordon points out that there’s a big difference between those fat cats and Washingtonians. “In the private sector, if you find a way to cut costs, you’re a hero. If you find a way to cut costs in the (government) bureaucracy, you’re a goat.”

You’re a “goat” because cutting waste hurts the lobbyists who feed off taxpayers. With trillions of dollars at stake, corporations and special interests would be crazy not to lobby. Lobbyists and taxpayer-funded special privilege won’t go away unless big government does.

We could improve America’s future just by recognizing what so-called “public choice” economists started to realize around the time of World War II: that government isn’t just a “public servant.” It’s not a demon, either. But government and its employees are selfish, like anyone else. That explains most of their behavior better than occasional shifts to the political left or right.

We all tend to overspend and act lazy when we can get away with it. In the private sector, though, that eventually means that you get fired or realize you’re depleting your bank account. In Washington, the Fed just prints more money.

As long as Washington spends other people’s money, there will be little incentive for them to be prudent -- or humble.







headline: How to meet the threat from China's army of cyber guerrillas
byline: By Gary Schmitt


When President Obama meets woth Chinese President Xi Jinping Friday and Saturday in Southern California, a major topic of conversation between the two will be Chinese cyber-attacks and cyber-espionage against American commercial and government targets. 

According to U.S. counterintelligence officials, billions upon billions of dollars worth of information has been “lifted” out of American computers and servers in recent years. 

In fact, only last week, newspapers were reporting that an internal Defense Department review had concluded that China had used cyber attacks to gather data on more than three dozen key U.S. military programs, including the country’s most advanced missile defense systems, naval warships and even the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter—the stealthy, fifth-generation jet that will be the backbone of the American military’s ability to sustain air superiority in the decades ahead.

To stem the tide of harmful cyber attacks by the Chinese there has to be a cyber response on America’s part that deters continued cyber aggression.

As one might expect, the Chinese government has denied any complicity in these attacks. And it is doubtful, given how successful Chinese efforts have been, that even “blunt” talk by the president to the new Chinese leader, will have much effect on Chinese practices.

The reality is, the Chinese government is engaged in a form of warfare—new to be sure in its technological aspects but not new in the sense that cyber attacks harm our relative military strength and damage the property (intellectual and proprietary) of citizens and companies alike.

So far, the American government’s response has largely been defensive, either talking to the Chinese about establishing new, agreed-upon “rules of road” for cyberspace or working assiduously to perfect new security walls to protect government and key private sector computer systems. 

Although neither effort should be abandoned, they are no more likely to work than, say, before World War II, the Kellogg-Briand Pact could outlaw war and the Maginot Line could protect France from an invading Germany.

This last point is especially important. When it comes to cyberspace, according to Cyber Command head and director of the National Security Agency, General Keith Alexander, those on the offensive side of the computer screen–that is, those hacking into or compromising computer systems–have the advantage over those on the defensive side who are trying to keep systems secure. Walls have always been breached and codes broken.

Moreover, attempts to beef up security are complicated by the fact that our own cyber warriors are undoubtedly reluctant to provide those charged with protecting systems here at home with the latest in their own capabilities.

In addition to increasing the chance such information might leak by expanding the number of persons in the know, efforts to use that information to plug our own vulnerabilities can inadvertently alert a potential adversary on the very backdoors American would want to save for using in a future crisis or conflict.

All of which leads to the conclusion that to stem the tide of harmful cyber attacks by the Chinese (or, for that matter, Iran, Russia or North Korea), there has to be a cyber response on America’s part that deters continued cyber aggression.

Reprisals that are proportionate, in self-defense and designed to stop others from such behavior falls well within the bounds of international law as traditionally understood.

Nor is it the case that such reprisals should be limited to responding to government-on-government cyber attacks. The U.S. government has always understood that it has an affirmative duty to protect the lives and property of its citizens from foreign aggression and, in times both past and current, this has meant using American military might. 

That need not be the case here, however. Indeed, one advantage of the cyber realm is the wide variety of options it offers up for reprisal that can inflict economic harm without causing loss of life or limb.

The good news is that the U.S. government has been gradually beefing up its offensive cyber capabilities.

Indeed, a little over a month ago in open testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, Gen. Alexander said that he created thirteen new teams that would go on the offensive if the nation were hit by a major cyber attack. And new reports coming out of the Pentagon indicate that the Joint Chiefs would like to empower geographic combatant commanders to counter cyber attacks with offensive cyber operations of their own.

These are necessary steps if we hope to create a deterrent to Chinese cyber aggression; however, they are not sufficient. 

The threat posed by China’s army of cyber “guerrillas” is constant, is directed at both the U.S. government and the private sector, and ranges from the annoying to the deadly serious. 

A truly adequate response would require meeting the Chinese challenge on all these fronts. And no amount of summitry between the American and Chinese leaders is likely to substitute for the cold, hard fact that, when it comes to Chinese misbehavior, upping the cost to Beijing is a necessary first step to reclaiming the peaceful potential of the newest of the “great commons,” cyberspace.





headline: Plan B for all girls -- science finally trumps politics and emotion
byline: By Cathleen London


Monday, the FDA issued a statement declaring it would approve Plan B One Step (a form of emergency contraception) for over the counter sale without restriction. 

It is about time.

This decision allows science to trump politics and emotion.

Plan B One step is a single dose of levonorgestrel, a hormone used in oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), that when taken within 3 days of unprotected sexual activity is effective in reducing the chance of pregnancy.

To deny young adolescents access to medically necessary and proven care is essentially reproductive slavery.

It works in a similar matter to oral contraceptives that are taken daily (though less effective than regular use of OCPs). 

It is NOT an abortifacient.

Emergency contraception (EC) has been available in the United States since 1999. At that time it was only available with a prescription. 

In 2009 it became available for those over 17 without a prescription, and retained its prescription status for those younger than 17. 

There are decades of data on the safety of emergency contraception. There is no situation in which the risk of EC (whether combined hormones or a single hormone such as Plan B) outweighs the benefits. 

Numerous studies have attested to the safety of levonorgestrel: there are NO reported deaths nor serious complications.

The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) carefully considered whether younger females were able to understand how to use Plan B one step. 

CDER determined, after looking at all the scientific evidence, that adolescent females understood that EC is NOT for routine use, and that the product does not protect them against sexually transmitted diseases. 

The scientific data also show that young adolescent females could use the product properly without the intervention of a healthcare provider. 

In 2011, after reviewing the process used by CDER, the FDA was ready to make Plan B One-Step over the counter (OTC) without restrictions. 

In an unprecedented move, the Secretary of Health and Human Services intervened and prevented Plan B One Step from attaining OTC status. This was not a decision based on the scientific evidence.

Emergency contraception (EC) is sold over the counter in 6 countries and is available directly from a pharmacist without a prescription in 54 countries. 

Studies have shown that repeated use of EC is safer than pregnancy, particularly when pregnancy is unintended. 

In the United States nearly 50% of pregnancies are unintended. Studies have shown that easier access to contraceptives reduces unintended pregnancy rates (and abortions). 

Not only are the concerns about whether young adolescent females can comprehend how to use EC demonstrably false, this is a group that needs access to health care that is proven to be safe and effective. 

If a young girl is sexually active, whether by choice or not, she should not be denied reproductive rights. She should be allowed to make timely reproductive decisions about her own body within the dictates of her religious and moral codes.

To deny young adolescents access to medically necessary and proven care is essentially reproductive slavery.

The FDA joins physicians and scientists including: the American Medical Association, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Association of Reproductive Health Professionals in its support of making Plan B over the counter without restrictions. 

Finally, science trumps politics.





headline: The real reason Obama tapped Susan Rice for national security adviser
byline: By K.T. McFarland


President Obama tapped UN Ambassador Susan Rice Tuesday to serve as our nation's next national security adviser.

Tuesday morning my reaction was why appoint Susan Rice as national security adviser? She will be a DISASTER.

Here's why: I spent seven years working for the most successful NSC adviser in history, Henry Kissinger.

I watched him conceive new policies, negotiate with foreign leaders, ride herd over the bureaucracy, massage the press and foreign policy intelligentsia and work behind the scenes with congressional leaders.

President Obama is rewarding Susan Rice for being a loyal (if incompetent) soldier.  

Susan Rice can’t do any of those things.

She has zero credibility with the media, on Capitol Hill, with the foreign policy community and foreign leaders, and is so badly tarnished by the Benghazi scandal that she walks into the job on Day One weak and wounded.

The most obvious problem is her disastrous performance on the Sunday talk shows peddling the administration’s fairy tale on Benghazi; when she was either complicit in the cover-up or incompetent.

Either she knew what really happened and deliberately lied to the American people or she was a mere actress who read the script she was given and didn’t know enough to question whether the words she spoke were accurate.

Rice might have been able to overcome the Benghazi debacle if she had other strong credentials, for example being a senior military officer like Colin Powell and Brent Scowcroft, or a respected academic like Henry Kissinger and Zbig Brzezinski. But Susan Rice is none of these.

When the spotlight was on her at the U.N. she was an ineffective ambassador who couldn't get Russia or China on board to deal with Syria or impose strict sanctions against Iran.

Not only did she fail to persuade those key members of the Security Council, she didn't know it until after the votes on sanctions were taken!

Benghazi was supposed to be her audition for the Secretary of State job -- go on all the Sunday talk shows and be the Obama administration’s primary spokesman.

She was so eager for the try out that she didn't stop and ask why they wanted her. The decision to send someone from the administration to appear on all five talk shows is a decision made at the highest levels of the White House.

It should have been the Secretary of State, or maybe Secretary of Defense, or CIA chief, or NSC Adviser or White House Chief of Staff – they were part of the decision process.

Susan Rice was the one senior administration official who knew nothing about events leading up to Benghazi and the attack itself, yet the White House asked her to go on those shows?

Alarm bells should have gone off in her head!

I checked their schedules and most of the other senior officials were in Washington and available that morning. It’s just that they were smarter than Rice and realized it was a poisoned chalice.

So what is Obama thinking with the Rice appointment? He’s doubling down and circling the wagons. He's rewarding Rice for being a loyal (if incompetent) soldier. He is hanging tough on the scandals and claiming that he knew nothing about them until he read about them in the papers.

On the other hand, maybe Obama's appointment of Rice is smarter than it looks on the surface.

By appointing Rice to the NSC job the president can invoke executive privilege and claim she doesn’t have to testify on Capitol Hill. And even if she does talk about Benghazi, at some point, she will certainly be a loyal soldier if she is now sitting just steps from the Oval Office.

But despite what the president might want the Benghazi isn't over, not by a long shot.





headline: Where's Obama as IRS, EPA compete for most bizarre scandal in Washington?
byline: By Reince Priebus


Fake employees who win awards. Workers building comfy warehouse hideaways. Big bucks shelled out for for pricey “happiness experts.” And professionally produced office dance videos.

No, it’s not the plot of a "Seinfeld" episode. It’s just the daily goings-on at the U.S. federal government.

But no one’s laughing at the waste of taxpayer money and the violation of public trust. (Or the IRS’sGilligan’s Island-themed training video. It just wasn’t funny.)

The last few days have produced story after story of astounding government incompetence.

An Inspector General Report issued Monday found that an EPA warehouse in Maryland stores all sorts of unused—and expensive!—equipment, purchased on the taxpayer dime and now gathering dust, including computers and pianos. (Read morein National Journal.)

The IRS and EPA must be in a competition for who can produce the most bizarre scandal.

Question: why does the Environmental Protection Agency purchase, store, and forget about multiple pianos?

Meanwhile, EPA employees used the warehouse to build “unauthorized and hidden personal spaces…that included televisions, refrigerators, radios, microwaves, chairs and couches.” They ensured their hideaways wouldn’t be caught by security cameras, and even built a makeshift gym.

A May 31 response to a Freedom of Information Act request showed, however, there seemed to be some model employees at the EPA. Like Richard Windsor.

Three years in a row, he was awarded a Certificate for Ethical Behavior, and was also given a certificate for completing cyber-security training courses. The only problem:Richard Windsor isn’t real. It was the email pseudonym adopted by former EPA Director Lisa Jackson, raising serious questions about whether she was intentionally avoiding FOIA requests for her email correspondence.

The IRS and EPA must be in a competition for who can produce the most bizarre scandal.

An Inspector General report on the IRS found the tax-collecting agency spent $50 million on 220 conferences between 2010 and 2012. Surely, these conferences were of critical importance if the IRS was spending taxpayer dollars on them, right?

Judge for yourself. Conference headliners included a “Happiness Expert,” an “Innovation Expert” and a $17,000 speaker who discussed “Leadership Through Art.” That sure doesn’t paint a picture of fiscal responsibility.

At the conferences, IRS employees filmed expensive dance videos and spent $60,000 to produce “Star Trek” and “Gilligan’s Island” themed training videos.

That’s not the only “tale of a fateful trip.” The IRS gave out baseball tickets, booked stays in presidential suites that cost thousands of dollars a night, and never bothered to negotiate lower room rates. (Be sure to read theAP storyfor all the details.)

In Obama’s Washington, there’s little accountability to be found. Officials shirk their responsibilities to be honest with taxpayers. For example, the Department of Veterans Affairs recently tried toget out ofa long-standing Freedom of Information Act request by saying that sequester cuts meant they didn’t have the funds to complete it.

But as it turns out, that department is exempt from any sequester cuts.

The Labor Department, facing a FOIA request from the Associated Press for political appointees’ email addresses, told the AP they’d hand them over but only for a price: $1.03 million. That, by the way, is illegal.

Government incompetence isout of control. The federal bureaucracy has grown too big to be accountable, too labyrinthine to be transparent.

In the past few weeks, the nation has learned more and more about the abuses of the IRS in its targeting of conservative groups.

We’ve sat slack-jawed at the news of the Justice Department’s tracking and monitoring of reporters. But these are just two especially shocking symptoms of a larger problem. And as we look closer and dig deeper, we’re finding more proof that excess government produces government excess. Worse, this is probably just the tip of the iceberg.

About a year ago, as he campaigned for reelection, President Obama said, “as president of the United States, it’s pretty clear to me that I’m responsible for folks who are working in the federal government and you know, Harry Truman said the buck stops with you.”

All the scandals and stories involve “folks who are working in the federal government.” So, by the president’s own standard, he’s “responsible.” Now he just needs to take responsibility.





headline: Could Friday bring good news for America's economy?
byline: By Peter Morici


Friday, forecasters expect the Labor Department will report the economy added 167,000 jobs in May. This is in line with the pace of recent months but hardly enough to lower unemployment down to acceptable levels.

In the first quarter, GDP was up only 2.4 percent, due to stronger consumer spending and an inventory bounce.

Despite greater optimism as expressed by consumers and small businesses in polls, in March and April consumer spending, industrial production, business inventories and manufacturing slowed.

The economy must add more than 365 thousand jobs each month for three years to lower unemployment to 6 percent.

Consequently, economists expect second quarter growth to be below 2 percent despite the recent euphoria generated by surging home sales.

Home prices were juiced by rock bottom mortgage rates that have since risen, and it is important to remember those asset transfers at higher prices only impact on GDP and employment to the extent those drive up consumer spending and new home construction. The former has not happened, and although home building is up, housing construction is only 3 percent of GDP.

Bottom line: a more robust economy can drive housing but surging housing prices are no panacea for what ails the economy and jobs market.

Since turning the corner in mid 2009, GDP growth has averaged 2.1 percent and unemployment has fallen from 10.0 percent to 7.5 percent.

In contrast, when high oil prices and double digit interest rates pushed unemployment to 10.8 percent during Ronald Reagan’s first term; then GDP growth averaged 5.0 percent and unemployment fell to 7.0 percent.

The economy must add more than 365 thousand jobs each month for three years to lower unemployment to 6 percent. That would require growth in the range of 4 to 5 percent and is not likely with current policies.

Factors contributing to the slow pace of recovery include the huge trade deficits on oil and manufactured products from China and elsewhere in Asia—these drain demand for U.S. goods and services.

Absent U.S. policies to effectively confront Asian governments about their purposefully undervalued currencies, and to develop more oil offshore and in Alaska, the trade deficit will continue to tax growth.

The recent surge in natural gas production, and accompanying lower prices, is substantially improving the competitiveness of energy-using industries like petrochemicals, fertilizers, plastics, and primary metals—as well as their consuming industries like industrial machinery and building materials.

However, Department of Energy efforts to boost exports of liquefied gas will reduce the trade deficit and boost growth much less, and create many fewer jobs, than keeping the gas in the United States for use by energy-intensive industries.

Dodd-Frank regulations make mortgages, refinancing, and home improvement loans much more difficult to obtain. The recovery in housing construction, though welcomed, remains lackluster as compared to past recoveries. In turn, this slows expansion in building materials, major appliances, furniture and other durable goods.

The high cost and slow pace of regulatory reviews are a constant complaint among businesses and dampen investment spending. Government needs to subject policies to protect the environment and other regulatory goals to the same efficacy standards the market applies to commercial technologies—regulatory assessments and enforcement are needed but those must be delivered cost effectively and quickly to add genuine value.

Many businesses with overseas opportunities remain tentative about adding capacity and hiring workers in the United States. Instead, they look to Asia where government policies are more accommodating and prospects for growth remain stronger.





headline: Progressives, Democrats must stand with New York Times against Obama on NSA phone records collection
byline: By Julie Roginsky


We have arrived at a defining moment for the progressive movement in this nation.

The New York Times editorial board, which has generally given this president a lot of leeway throughout his career, wrote a scathing denunciation Friday of the Obama administration’s use of data mining, claiming that “the administration has now lost all credibility" on the issue of balancing civil rights with national security.

Every progressive with even a shred of moral consistency should side with the New York Times against the White House.

The events of the past month – from the Associated Press subpoena to the James Rosen search warrant to the revelation that our government has been indiscriminately collecting phone records data – have forced liberals to make a choice between complacency and outrage, between keeping silent because one of our own is in the White House and calling him out on betraying the principles for which we have fought for so long.

Every progressive with even a shred of moral consistency should side with the New York Times against the White House.

Consistency has never been the fiber of political discourse but it is nonetheless a vital ingredient of credibility.

Progressives rightly denounced the overreach of the Bush administration when it came to abuses of the Patriot Act. We should just as strongly denounce the expansion of those abuses by this administration.

Many of us did not buy the previous administration’s excuse that overreaching infringement upon the civil rights of ordinary Americans was a necessary step in keeping those same ordinary Americans safe. We should not buy it from this administration now, simply because this president is ostensibly one of us.

If this White House truly wanted to level with the American people, the president would have gone on national television to explain the necessity of these programs and the trade-offs between civil liberties and security he believes are consistent with his policies.

That he has failed to do this for nearly six years is evidence of the fact that there is likely no excuse for such blanket surveillance upon the American public, aside from the usual “it’s necessary to keep us safe” bromide.

Once the shock of 9/11 wore off for a lot of us, it became apparent that our government was happy to use its pretext for all sorts of questionable activity.

From the invasion of Iraq to the nearly unanimous passage of the Patriot Act, elected officials on both sides of the aisle did not hesitate to grab as much power as possible under the guise of national security.

This behavior was not limited to one political party or the other – so the criticism of this behavior should not be emanating from one party and not the other.

Over the past several days, conservatives have pilloried this administration for a policy that began under the previous one with the mantra that Bush only went after terrorists, while Obama is going after regular Americans.

This is as ridiculous as it is false.

No one should give any president a blank check to vastly expand executive power based on his word that he is doing it in the national interest.

The phone records of millions of Americans have been collected and analyzed by both administrations without any explanation of how violating our privacy protects our security.

As progressives, we cannot remain silent when a president, whom we worked hard to elect and defend at every turn, betrays the very values upon which he ran five years ago.

The New York Times was right to call out the administration on this, just as others have been right to call out its egregious behavior towards the Associated Press and James Rosen.

Progressives should stand with the Times on this. Otherwise, we are just rooting for the name on the jersey, and not for the values that the jersey represents.





headline: What men want
byline: By Suzanne Venker


Father’s Day 2013 arrives on Sunday. Here’s what we have to show for it: According to a survey conducted by Today Moms, more than half of the 7,000 mothers polled feel more stressed out by their husbands than they do by their kids.

Imagine if the “Today Show” had polled men instead and the response was the same: “More than half of all husbands feel more stressed out by their wives than they do by their kids.”

That would never happen. Not because it’s never true, but because men don’t tend to point fingers—particularly at their wives.

When pressed, however, they will tell you what they want. In a 2012 "Today Show" survey of 1,500 dads, two-thirds of the respondents said what they want most from their partner is “a little verbal acknowledgement.” In other words: respect.

In the past, taking care of a husband was something women did with pride. Today, it’s done—if it’s done at all—with resentment.

It should be noted that these polls are from the “Today Show” not Gallup. But that doesn’t make the findings insignificant. The results are, in fact, commensurate with my research on marriage and family dynamics. It is simply indisputable that women with children have become more stressed over the past decade—and that all too often they blame their husbands as the source of their discontent.

“We can’t be expected to raise children, bring home the bacon, and take care of our husbands!” women say. It’s all too much.

Indeed it is. But are men to blame? After all, they didn’t demand society change the rules so drastically. Women did.

In the past, taking care of a husband was something women did with pride. Today, it’s done—if it’s done at all—with resentment. The implication seems to be, “My husband is a grown man! He can take care of himself!” If that is how you feel, then what you’re saying is that a marriage should take care of itself.

But it can’t. A marriage is like a garden: if you don’t tend to it, it will die. Taking care of one’s spouse is part of the deal—and men don’t mind one bit. They love taking care of their wives. In exchange, however, they want to feel needed. And they don’t.

This gender dynamic is lost on modern women, who pride themselves on being strong and independent. But those qualities can undermine love. As Steve Harvey wrote in “Act Like a Lady, Think Like a Man,” “If you’ve got your own money, your own car, your own house, a Brinks alarm system, a pistol, and a guard dog, and you’re practically shouting from the rooftops that you don’t need a man to provide for you or protect you, then we will see no need to keep coming around. What in the world do you need us for if you have all of that?”

For months Americans have been dissecting the changing role of women and its effect on gender relations. The conclusion seems to be that men are threatened by women’s independence.

I disagree.

Men are happy to have women out doing their thing. What does threaten is the implication—or worse, assertion—that men bring nothing of value to the table. “Men know women are powerful, and we don’t mind that one bit. It empowers us that you’re empowered,” writes clinical psychiatrist Paul Dobransky, M.D. “Unless, that is, you disempower us in order to feel empowered.” And there it is.

It’s time to admit the truth: the so-called rise of women has come at men’s expense. Men have been disempowered.

If what I’m saying is true, you ask, then what is the solution? To turn back the clock? No—that’s impossible. (Though I do believe the one-income family, which offers a notably stress-free lifestyle, will make a comeback—the difference being that more and more dads will be the ones to stay home, which I think is a great compromise to the relentless work/family conflict.)

What I am saying is that women must be cognizant of how they use their newfound ambition. If a woman’s desire for independence is used to suggest, either verbally or non-verbally, that men are superfluous—or that a husband is just one more child to take care of—love will remain elusive. No one wants to feel like a nuisance.

So this Father’s Day, let’s give men what they want: respect. Instead of complaining about what husbands and fathers don’t do, let’s honor them for what they do do—and see if that exchange doesn’t translate to a happier, less stressful home.





headline: State Department sex scandal allegations hit home
byline: By Cal Thomas


Ever since President Clinton "did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky," whatever remains of standards seems to have fallen even lower among people who hold offices and positions once thought to require good behavior and strong moral character.

Last year, several Secret Service agents left the agency amid scandal after allegedly engaging the services of prostitutes while advancing a trip to Cartagena, Colombia, for President Obama.

A side note: One of the prostitutes, Dania Londono Suarez, wrote a tell-all book about the incident titled "Room Service." According to the Huffington Post's Latinovoices, she's also opening a non-profit to "help hookers" and "has a modeling contract, plus a deal to bring her story to television." Of course, she does.

How can the United States project its core values when people who represent it behave like out-of-control college kids on spring break?

Just this week, CBS News reported that "the State Department may have covered up allegations of illegal and inappropriate behavior within its ranks." The allegations were contained in an internal Office of Inspector General memo, leaked by a former State Department investigator, which, according to CBS News, "cited eight specific examples" of impropriety, including the 2011 investigation into an ambassador who "routinely ditched ... his protective security detail" in order to "solicit sexual favors from prostitutes."

The ambassador, of course, denies the allegations. So, not surprisingly, does the State Department, which, reports ABC News, "offered a point-by-point pushback" to the memo's claims.

"We take allegations of misconduct seriously and we investigate thoroughly," State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki told reporters Monday.

Not so, says the memo. It alleges State Department investigations into the charges were "influenced, manipulated, or simply called off."

As if that isn't enough, the memo claims the State Department may have covered up details about an underground drug ring operating near the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad that allegedly supplied security contractors with drugs.

According to CBS News, the memo also includes allegations that a State Department security official in Beirut "engaged in sexual assaults on foreign nationals hired as embassy guards" and that members of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's security details "engaged prostitutes while on official trips in foreign countries."

The solicitation of prostitutes among security details, alleges the memo, was an "endemic" problem.

This is worse than outrageous. These incidents, if proved true, are a stain on the honor and reputation of the country these people are, or were, supposed to represent.

In 1958, William Lederer and Eugene Burdick published a novel called "The Ugly American," which graphically detailed why U.S. diplomacy failed in Southeast Asia and why communism didn't. Our arrogance and boorish behavior doomed us there.

Unfortunately, the book turned out to be prophetic. Is history repeating itself, not on a military or political level, but in the destruction of what remains of our moral underpinnings?

How can the United States project its core values when people who represent it behave like out-of-control college kids on spring break?

There was a time when bad behavior carried serious consequences; a time when those who exhibited bad behavior suffered socially for their lapses. They lost jobs; they lost marriages; they lost friends.

Today, they're rewarded with book contracts and reality TV shows. What happened to doing what's right, instead of doing who's easy?

People who grew up with parents who instilled a strong moral code, attended schools that reinforced it and lived in communities that affirmed it, now find that if they question bad behavior today they're considered behind the times, even prudish.

With the media portraying all sorts of behavior as acceptable; with politicians in high places getting away with low behavior and in some cases paying little or no penalty, where are the deterrents?

Disappointing family used to be the default position for avoiding extramarital entanglements in cases where religious or ethical values did not apply.

While each man should be held accountable for his own behavior, the rest of us should consider what we're promoting and tolerating as a nation and the permission it gives others to follow bad examples.

Irving Berlin wrote a silly song called "The Secret Service (Makes Me Nervous)." We should all be nervous. We should also ask ourselves what we intend to do about it.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Obama's Benghazi woes won't end unless he comes clean
byline: By Karl Rove


President Obama may think the dispute over his handling of Benghazi is a “sideshow,” but his remarks Monday at the joint press briefing with British Prime Minister Cameron are evidence that his administration misled the American people and is trying to do so even today.

For example, in just one paragraph consisting of two sentences, Mr. Obama contradicted himself twice. Mid-way through one his lengthy non-answer, the president said:

“Keep in mind, by the way, these so-called talking points that were prepared for Susan Rice five, six days after the event occurred pretty much matched the assessments that I was receiving at that time in my presidential daily briefing. And keep in mind that two to three days after Susan Rice appeared on the Sunday shows, using these talking points, which have been the source of all this controversy, I sent up the head of our National Counterterrorism Center, Matt Olsen, up to Capitol Hill and specifically said it was an act of terrorism and that extremist elements inside of Libya had been involved in it.”

Let’s unpack these two sentences. First, Mr. Obama claims that his briefing from the CIA put the blame for the Benghazi attack on an anti-Muslim YouTube video, even though we know that (a) the video had nothing to do with the attack in Benghazi and (b) no mention of the videos appeared in any version of the talking points.

The president is getting deeper into trouble.  He must come clean by revealing who directed the CIA to remove the language about terrorism

So precisely who pinned the blame for the attacks on the video? And will the president reveal his intelligence briefings to an investigative committee to prove that the final talking points tracked what the intelligence community was telling him?

In addition, if the president’s press conference statement is true – that he and his top aides were saying right after Benghazi that these were Islamist-inspired terrorist attacks – then why did a September 20, 2012 New York Times story begin this way?

“The White House is now calling the assault on the American diplomatic facility in Benghazi, Libya, a ‘terrorist attack.’”

“It is self-evident that what happened in Benghazi was a terrorist attack,” the White House press secretary, Jay Carney, told reporters aboard Air Force One on Thursday. ‘Our embassy was attacked violently and the result was four deaths of American officials.’

“Until now, White House officials have not used that language in describing the assault.”

And why were the following (accurate) phrases excised from the CIA’s original draft of the talking points:

…as to who is responsible for the violence, although the crowd almost certainly was a mix of individuals. That being said, there are indications that Islamic extremists participated in the violent demonstrations. 

The wide availability of weapons and experienced fighters in Libya almost certainly contribute to the lethality of the attacks.

The Agency has produced numerous pieces of the threat of extremists linked to al-Qa'ida in Benghazi and eastern Libya. Since April, there have been at least five other attacks against foreign interests in Benghazi by unidentified assailants, including the June attack against the British Ambassador's convoy. We cannot rule out the individuals has [sic] previously surveilled the U.S. facilities, also contributing to the efficacy of the attacks

It certainly appears as if on Saturday, September 15, someone in the administration told the Deputy Director of the CIA to delete these words from the draft talking points.

We don’t yet know who this was, but we need to find out. And you can bet that individual was not a press aide like the State Department press spokeswoman or the communication guy at the National Security Council.

It is simply bizarre for Mr. Obama to suggest the CIA would chuck its early, accurate findings and instead (falsely) inform him that the Benghazi attack was a simple spontaneous reaction to an anti-Muslim video.

Second, Mr. Obama says after Ambassador Rice made the round of five Sunday morning talk programs to sell the blame-it-on-the-video line, that he, the commander-in-chief, sent Matt Olsen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center “up to Capitol Hill…specifically” to say “it was an act of terrorism and that extremist elements inside of Libya had been involved in it.”

If that were in fact the case, then why was Ms. Rice, the most visible and prominent administration spokesperson on this matter, telling the American people something utterly at odds with what Mr. Olsen was telling members of Congress?

As he is prone to do, Mr. Obama constantly misstated the facts Monday. For example, he said “congressional committees” had “reviewed” administration emails about the evolution of the talking points “several months ago” and “concluded that, in fact, there was nothing afoul in terms of the process that we had used.”

That’s certainly not what we heard last week. Just when did which congressional committee clear the administration on preparation of the talking points?

The president is getting deeper into trouble. He must come clean by revealing who directed the CIA to remove the language about terrorism and who authorized that person or persons to so direct the CIA.

He must disclose who prepared Susan Rice for the Sunday morning talk programs and directed her to say something that they knew at the time was untrue. And the president must explain to us, fully and in detail, why he was still wrongly blaming the attacks on the YouTube video weeks after they had taken place.Because the president’s strategy of a modified limited hangout won’t work any longer.



Karl Rove is a Fox News political analyst and a former senior adviser and deputy chief of staff to President George W. Bush. He is the author of "Courage and Consequence: My Life as a Conservative in the Fight" (Threshold Editions, 2010) and helped organize the political action committee American Crossroads.



headline: What you need to know about Islam vs. Islamism
byline: By Daniel Pipes


What motives lay behind last month's Boston Marathon bombing and the would-be attack on a VIA Rail Canada train?

Leftists and establishmentarians variously offer imprecise and tired replies – such as "violent extremism" or anger at Western imperialism – unworthy of serious discussion.

Conservatives, in contrast, engage in a lively and serious debate among themselves: some say Islam the religion provides motive, others say it's a modern extremist variant of the religion, known as radical Islam or Islamism.

As a participant in the latter debate, here's my argument for focusing on Islamism.

Those focusing on Islam itself as the problem (such as ex-Muslims like Wafa Sultan and Ayaan Hirsi Ali) point to the consistency from Muhammad's life and the contents of the Koran and Hadith to current Muslim practice.

Being a Muslim then meant belonging to a winning team, a fact that broadly inspired Muslims to associate their faith with mundane success.

Agreeing with Geert Wilders' film Fitna, they point to striking continuities between Koranic verses and jihad actions. They quote Islamic scriptures to establish the centrality of Muslim supremacism, jihad, and misogyny, concluding that a moderate form of Islam is impossible.

They point to Turkish prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan's deriding the very idea of a moderate Islam.

Their killer question is, "Was Muhammad a Muslim or an Islamist?" They contend that we who blame Islamism do so out of political correctness or cowardliness.

To which, we reply: Yes, certain continuities do exist; and Islamists definitely follow the Koran and Hadith literally.

Moderate Muslims exist but lack Islamists' near-hegemonic power.

Erdoğan's denial of moderate Islam points to a curious overlap between Islamism and the anti-Islam viewpoint.

Muhammad was a plain Muslim, not an Islamist, for the latter concept dates back only to the 1920s. And no, we are not cowardly but offer our true analysis.

And that analysis goes like this:

Islam is the fourteen-century-old faith of a billion-plus believers that includes everyone from quietist Sufis to violent jihadis. Muslims achieved remarkable military, economic, and cultural success between roughly 600 and 1200 c.e.

Being a Muslim then meant belonging to a winning team, a fact that broadly inspired Muslims to associate their faith with mundane success. Those memories of medieval glory remain not just alive but central to believers' confidence in Islam and in themselves as Muslims.

The modern Muslim trauma begins: Napoleon at the Battle of the Pyramids, 1798, as imagined by Antoine-Jean Gros.

Major dissonance began around 1800, when Muslims unexpectedly lost wars, markets, and cultural leadership to Western Europeans.

It continues today, as Muslims bunch toward the bottom of nearly every index of achievement.

This shift has caused massive confusion and anger. What went wrong, why did God seemingly abandon His faithful? The unbearable divergence between premodern accomplishment and modern failure brought about trauma.

Muslims have responded to this crisis in three main ways.

- Secularists want Muslims to ditch the Shari'a (Islamic law) and emulate the West.

- Apologists also emulate the West but pretend that in doing so they are following the Shari'a. Islamists reject the West in favor of a retrograde and full application of the Shari'a.

- Islamists loathe the West because of its being tantamount to Christendom, the historic archenemy, and its vast influence over Muslims.Islamism inspires a drive to reject, defeat, and subjugate Western civilization.

Despite this urge, Islamists absorb Western influences, including the concept of ideology. Indeed, Islamism represents the transformation of Islamic faith into a political ideology.

Islamism accurately indicates an Islamic-flavored version of radical utopianism, an "-ism" like other "-isms," comparable to fascism and communism. Aping those two movements, for example, Islamism relies heavily on conspiracy theories to interpret the world, on the state to advance its ambitions, and on brutal means to attain its goals.

Supported by 10-15 percent of Muslims, Islamism draws on devoted and skilled cadres who have an impact far beyond their limited numbers. It poses the threat to civilized life in Iran, Egypt, and not just on the streets of Boston but also in Western schools, parliaments, and courtrooms.

Our killer question is "How do you propose to defeat Islamism?" Those who make all Islam their enemy not only succumb to a simplistic and essentialist illusion but they lack any mechanism to defeat it.

We who focus on Islamism see World War II and the Cold War as models for subduing the third totalitarianism. We understand that radical Islam is the problem and moderate Islam is the solution.

We work with anti-Islamist Muslims to vanquish a common scourge. We will triumph over this new variant of barbarism so that a modern form of Islam can emerge.





headline: Team Obama's plan to turn your kids into debt zombies
byline: By Arthur Herman


President Obama spent Friday talking about ways to make college more affordable. But if you think going to college is expensive now, just wait until you learn about his big plans for your college student or high school graduate–and you.

Everyone knows college student debt has piled up to Himalayan-size proportions, growing from just over $200 billion in 2012 to almost $1 trillion in 2012. That’s more than the nation’s total credit card or auto loan debt–and eight out of ten of those dollars are owed to the federal government, which has become the super shark of the student loan business.

So in May and June, as high school graduation parties were ending and schools were cleaning up from commencement, the Obama White House announced a plan to turn that mounting debt to its own advantage: and in effect turn your kids into debt zombies working for Big Government and various liberal causes.

The proposal is for a new program of debt forgiveness for students carrying federal loans -- loans which for the average college grad amount to more than $23,000 and for those who attended medical or law or business school, easily run into six figures.

The real way to fix the student debt crisis is to get Washington out of the student loan business, not get it deeper in.

Those in the program would make monthly payments on their loans limited to just 10 percent of their income after taxes and living expenses, regardless of how much they owe. Then at the end of a given period, the remaining balance--no matter how huge–will all be forgiven.

Sounds too good to be true. But here’s the catch; the period of repayment is set at twenty years, but only ten years for students who decide to go to work in the public or non-profit sector (for which, as we’ve learned from the IRS scandal, no conservatives or groups disagreeing with administration policy on Israel or anything else, need apply).

The message to every college grad will be crystal clear. Rather than going to work at Alcoa or Pepsi, you can get out of debt twice as fast by working for your state's Department of Motor Vehicles or your alma mater’s Affirmative Action Office, not to mention the Internal Revenue Service and Greenpeace–which of course is the whole idea.

The message to America’s colleges and universities is just as clear. They’ll have no incentive to lower their costs–and since 1990 the cost of attending a four-year college or university has risen four times the rate of inflation, or 300 percent–because college students will have every incentive to get as a big loan as possible that they’ll never have to pay back. In fact, the bigger the better.

Meanwhile, college curricula that are already skewed against capitalism and the private sector will get even more skewed, with students demanding degrees that prepare them for the fast track out of student debt and into a lifetime serving government, instead becoming part of a genuinely productive economy.

And the message to taxpayers is also clear. Your hard-earned tax dollars are going to be spent putting your sons and daughters into debt so we can harness them for a decade or more as public employees. Then you’ll also foot the bill when the balance comes due, because Obama wants to make sure his little army of public service zombies don’t pay tax on that forgiven debt (usually you do).

How big a bill? Barclays Bank figures Washington’s current debt forgiveness program with its more restrictive public service job requirement and a fifteen percent of income ceiling, will cost taxpayers an additional $300 billion by 2020. With Obama’s far more liberal proposal, we’ll be looking at lot more money than that.

The real way to fix the student debt crisis–and the soaring cost of college-is to get Washington out of the student loan business, not get it deeper in.

All Obama’s program needs is Congressional approval to become law. If it does, we’ll have passed one more landmark in turning the United States into a socialist country -- and one more in turning our college grads into a nation of debt peons.





headline: Where's Obama as IRS, EPA compete for most bizarre scandal in Washington?
byline: By Reince Priebus


Fake employees who win awards. Workers building comfy warehouse hideaways. Big bucks shelled out for for pricey “happiness experts.” And professionally produced office dance videos.

No, it’s not the plot of a "Seinfeld" episode. It’s just the daily goings-on at the U.S. federal government.

But no one’s laughing at the waste of taxpayer money and the violation of public trust. (Or the IRS’sGilligan’s Island-themed training video. It just wasn’t funny.)

The last few days have produced story after story of astounding government incompetence.

An Inspector General Report issued Monday found that an EPA warehouse in Maryland stores all sorts of unused—and expensive!—equipment, purchased on the taxpayer dime and now gathering dust, including computers and pianos. (Read morein National Journal.)

The IRS and EPA must be in a competition for who can produce the most bizarre scandal.

Question: why does the Environmental Protection Agency purchase, store, and forget about multiple pianos?

Meanwhile, EPA employees used the warehouse to build “unauthorized and hidden personal spaces…that included televisions, refrigerators, radios, microwaves, chairs and couches.” They ensured their hideaways wouldn’t be caught by security cameras, and even built a makeshift gym.

A May 31 response to a Freedom of Information Act request showed, however, there seemed to be some model employees at the EPA. Like Richard Windsor.

Three years in a row, he was awarded a Certificate for Ethical Behavior, and was also given a certificate for completing cyber-security training courses. The only problem:Richard Windsor isn’t real. It was the email pseudonym adopted by former EPA Director Lisa Jackson, raising serious questions about whether she was intentionally avoiding FOIA requests for her email correspondence.

The IRS and EPA must be in a competition for who can produce the most bizarre scandal.

An Inspector General report on the IRS found the tax-collecting agency spent $50 million on 220 conferences between 2010 and 2012. Surely, these conferences were of critical importance if the IRS was spending taxpayer dollars on them, right?

Judge for yourself. Conference headliners included a “Happiness Expert,” an “Innovation Expert” and a $17,000 speaker who discussed “Leadership Through Art.” That sure doesn’t paint a picture of fiscal responsibility.

At the conferences, IRS employees filmed expensive dance videos and spent $60,000 to produce “Star Trek” and “Gilligan’s Island” themed training videos.

That’s not the only “tale of a fateful trip.” The IRS gave out baseball tickets, booked stays in presidential suites that cost thousands of dollars a night, and never bothered to negotiate lower room rates. (Be sure to read theAP storyfor all the details.)

In Obama’s Washington, there’s little accountability to be found. Officials shirk their responsibilities to be honest with taxpayers. For example, the Department of Veterans Affairs recently tried toget out ofa long-standing Freedom of Information Act request by saying that sequester cuts meant they didn’t have the funds to complete it.

But as it turns out, that department is exempt from any sequester cuts.

The Labor Department, facing a FOIA request from the Associated Press for political appointees’ email addresses, told the AP they’d hand them over but only for a price: $1.03 million. That, by the way, is illegal.

Government incompetence isout of control. The federal bureaucracy has grown too big to be accountable, too labyrinthine to be transparent.

In the past few weeks, the nation has learned more and more about the abuses of the IRS in its targeting of conservative groups.

We’ve sat slack-jawed at the news of the Justice Department’s tracking and monitoring of reporters. But these are just two especially shocking symptoms of a larger problem. And as we look closer and dig deeper, we’re finding more proof that excess government produces government excess. Worse, this is probably just the tip of the iceberg.

About a year ago, as he campaigned for reelection, President Obama said, “as president of the United States, it’s pretty clear to me that I’m responsible for folks who are working in the federal government and you know, Harry Truman said the buck stops with you.”

All the scandals and stories involve “folks who are working in the federal government.” So, by the president’s own standard, he’s “responsible.” Now he just needs to take responsibility.





headline: For the good of the country, let's abolish the IRS
byline: By Cal Thomas


Given the revelation two weeks ago that the IRS targeted conservative groups seeking tax-exempt status, it's worth recalling President Obama's Ohio State University commencement address earlier this month.. The president decried "voices" warning "that tyranny is always lurking just around the corner."

It's no longer lurking. It's here.

Testimony before the House Ways and Means Committee by the outgoing acting IRS commissioner, Steve Miller, as well as numerous statements by individuals claiming they have been harassed and intimidated by IRS agents, reveal a government agency out of control, or more precisely, under the control of political hacks.



It's doubtful this was a freelance operation. J. Russell George, the Treasury inspector general for tax administration, testified he knew as early as June 2012 that the IRS was targeting conservatives, but did nothing to stop it during the presidential campaign. Who else knew?

The delay in tax exemption approval prevented some conservative groups from donating money to the Romney campaign or to groups supporting his candidacy. The IRS even asked one Tea Party group in Richmond to identify all of their financial donors and volunteers.

There is a simple way to restrain the IRS so this type of intrusion doesn't happen again: get rid of it. That's what Steve Forbes proposed in his run for president in 1996 and 2000. So did former presidential candidate Rep. Ron Paul (R-Texas). Forbes proposed a flat tax of 17 percent and a simple tax code. Individuals could file their tax returns on a post card.

"In the late 1800s, when Congress first attempted to impose an income tax, the notion of taxing a citizen's hard work was considered radical," Paul wrote in 2001. "Public outcry ensued; more importantly, the Supreme Court ruled the income tax unconstitutional. Only with passage of the 16th Amendment did Congress gain the ability to tax the productive endeavors of its citizens." And tax it did. And waste it did.

Paul contends the income tax amounts to only about one-third of federal revenue. I'm willing to wager that if nonessential government agencies and programs were eliminated and those remaining were reformed, or privatized, the savings would more than make up for the revenue loss.

Congressional Democrats -- and some Republicans -- will be reluctant to propose such a "radical" solution, because too many focus on revenue and not enough on misspending and dysfunctional agencies and programs.

The testimony that came out of the recent House Ways and Means Committee hearing is just a part of what constitutional attorney John W. Whitehead writes about in his new book, "A Government of Wolves: The Emerging American Police State." It sounds alarmist, but reading it should sound an alarm for every American.

The summary on the book jacket says Whitehead "paints a chilling portrait of a nation in the final stages of transformation into a police state." Examples include the growing number of "surveillance cameras, drug-sniffing dogs, SWAT raids, roadside strip searches, blood draws at DUI checkpoints, drones, GPS tracking devices, zero tolerance policies, over-criminalization, and free speech zones."

In his introduction to the book, writer and First Amendment authority Nat Hentoff says: "...I believe we are in a worse state now than ever before in this country. With the surveillance state closing in on us, we are fighting to keep our country free from our own government."

Like most tyrannies, this one is being ushered in with a smile. The public is told it is for our "security" and that it's good for us. With taxation, we are told the government "needs" our money and if we complain they are taking too much and wasting it, we're thought to be "greedy" and "unfair."

Thomas Jefferson foresaw what can happen when power corrupts: "Experience hath shewn, that even under the best forms of government those entrusted with power have, in time, and by slow operations, perverted it into tyranny."

Jefferson would see the IRS scandal and Whitehead's warnings as prime examples. Repeal the 16th Amendment, eliminate the IRS, put the government back within its constitutional boundaries and tyranny will be defeated.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Progressives, Democrats must stand with New York Times against Obama on NSA phone records collection
byline: By Julie Roginsky


We have arrived at a defining moment for the progressive movement in this nation.

The New York Times editorial board, which has generally given this president a lot of leeway throughout his career, wrote a scathing denunciation Friday of the Obama administration’s use of data mining, claiming that “the administration has now lost all credibility" on the issue of balancing civil rights with national security.

Every progressive with even a shred of moral consistency should side with the New York Times against the White House.

The events of the past month – from the Associated Press subpoena to the James Rosen search warrant to the revelation that our government has been indiscriminately collecting phone records data – have forced liberals to make a choice between complacency and outrage, between keeping silent because one of our own is in the White House and calling him out on betraying the principles for which we have fought for so long.

Every progressive with even a shred of moral consistency should side with the New York Times against the White House.

Consistency has never been the fiber of political discourse but it is nonetheless a vital ingredient of credibility.

Progressives rightly denounced the overreach of the Bush administration when it came to abuses of the Patriot Act. We should just as strongly denounce the expansion of those abuses by this administration.

Many of us did not buy the previous administration’s excuse that overreaching infringement upon the civil rights of ordinary Americans was a necessary step in keeping those same ordinary Americans safe. We should not buy it from this administration now, simply because this president is ostensibly one of us.

If this White House truly wanted to level with the American people, the president would have gone on national television to explain the necessity of these programs and the trade-offs between civil liberties and security he believes are consistent with his policies.

That he has failed to do this for nearly six years is evidence of the fact that there is likely no excuse for such blanket surveillance upon the American public, aside from the usual “it’s necessary to keep us safe” bromide.

Once the shock of 9/11 wore off for a lot of us, it became apparent that our government was happy to use its pretext for all sorts of questionable activity.

From the invasion of Iraq to the nearly unanimous passage of the Patriot Act, elected officials on both sides of the aisle did not hesitate to grab as much power as possible under the guise of national security.

This behavior was not limited to one political party or the other – so the criticism of this behavior should not be emanating from one party and not the other.

Over the past several days, conservatives have pilloried this administration for a policy that began under the previous one with the mantra that Bush only went after terrorists, while Obama is going after regular Americans.

This is as ridiculous as it is false.

No one should give any president a blank check to vastly expand executive power based on his word that he is doing it in the national interest.

The phone records of millions of Americans have been collected and analyzed by both administrations without any explanation of how violating our privacy protects our security.

As progressives, we cannot remain silent when a president, whom we worked hard to elect and defend at every turn, betrays the very values upon which he ran five years ago.

The New York Times was right to call out the administration on this, just as others have been right to call out its egregious behavior towards the Associated Press and James Rosen.

Progressives should stand with the Times on this. Otherwise, we are just rooting for the name on the jersey, and not for the values that the jersey represents.





headline: Will Benghazi be Hillary’s 'bump on the road' to the White House?
byline: By Jon Kraushar


With Benghazi, has Hillary Clinton hit what President Obama might call a “bump on the road” in her widely assumed bid for the presidency in 2016?

Some Republicans say yes. According to National Public Radio, “high-profile Republican, Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, who is displaying signs of being interested in a 2016 presidential run, recently told a Missouri audience that Clinton has disqualified herself for future public office by her actions.” At a “Spirit of Reagan” award ceremony, Paul said that, “I think that her dereliction of duty -- I don't question her motives -- but her dereliction of duty and her lack of leadership should preclude her from holding any other office.”

Rep. Elijah Cummings, D-Md., the top Democrat on the House oversight committee looking into Benghazi, summarizes the response of the defenders of former Secretary of State Clinton. He says that Republicans are using the witnesses' statements at the Benghazi hearings for “political purposes.”

The backdrop to Mrs. Clinton’s situation is what the news media call the “narrative” of her public and political life. Consistent with Congressman Cummings’ framing, that narrative -- pushed by Mrs. Clinton’s admirers in her party and the press—is that she is so elevated in stature that she is “above” the petty bickering of “politics.”

This is patently absurd. Mrs. Clinton is clearly comfortable with her own brand of “political purposes.” As Bill Clinton’s wife, as a former First Lady in Arkansas and Washington, as a U.S. Senator, and Secretary of State and before that as a political activist, she has been deeply involved in politics going all the way back to her college days.

Indeed, she served as a researcher for the House Judiciary Committee about procedures, grounds and standards for impeachment at the time of Watergate. And now, with Benghazi, in a supreme irony, the same questions are being asked about Mrs. Clinton as were asked about former President Richard Nixon concerning Watergate:

What did she know and when did she know it? What did she do (or not do)? Did she lie, distort, cover up and evade responsibility? Did she place politics above ethics? Did she seek deniability over accountability? Did her staff and advisors peddle false stories about causes and effects? Did they try to impugn the integrity and motives of those who have criticized her? Was she devious and complicit? What were the broader human and political costs of her involvement in the events being investigated? How does all this affect her legacy and reputation (her past) and what implications does it have for her future as a public figure and a participant in public life?

Abraham Lincoln said that, “Public sentiment is everything. With public sentiment, nothing can fail. Without it, nothing can succeed.”

The public sentiment about Hillary Clinton has traditionally been sky-high, as measured by the Gallup Poll. Three months after the Benghazi attack, in December of 2012, a Gallup Poll found Mrs. Clinton to be “the most admired woman in the world,” with 21 percent selecting her and with First Lady Michelle Obama a distant second at five percent. It was the 17th time in 20 years that Mrs. Clinton had taken that title.

The challenge to the public sentiment about Hillary Clinton with the Benghazi hearings depends on its effect on Mrs. Clinton’s carefully constructed personal and political narrative, which has always depended on a paradox: that she is both a victor and a victim.

Her supporters celebrate what they believe is Mrs. Clinton’s superior competence, intelligence, compassion and her toughness and resilience when under attack by her critics. In this, they portray her as a victor.

Simultaneously, Mrs. Clinton’s narrative depicts her as a victim. During her husband’s enmeshment in a scandal about his affair with a White House intern, Monica Lewinsky, Mrs. Clinton told NBC’s Matt Lauer that there was a “vast right-wing conspiracy that has been conspiring against my husband since the day he announced for president." Mrs. Clinton’s playing of the victim card and her conspiracy theories have encompassed an abundance of charges against her over the years, including her questionable investing record (Whitewater real estate, cattle futures trading) and her role in the so-called “Filegate” and “Travelgate” allegations.

Whether she is presented as a victor or a victim, the basis of Mrs. Clinton’s narrative has always been that she is a sympathetic figure, besieged by unsympathetic critics. But the officials testifying in the Benghazi hearings are initially coming across as sincere and emotionally sympathetic. The parents of the slain Americans at Benghazi who have appeared in TV interviews have likewise been sincere and emotionally sympathetic.

In her belated Senate testimony about Benghazi back in January, Mrs. Clinton looked markedly unsympathetic -- angry, aggressive and insensitive -- as she pounded the desk and shouted, “What difference, at this point, does it make?”

Even if a “smoking gun” is revealed about Mrs. Clinton’s involvement in Benghazi, it is wise to consider that she has survived other smoking guns in her and her husband’s past. The power of her personal and political narrative -- with its soap opera-like ups and downs -- is ingrained in America’s consciousness. And in good and bad times for her, Americans in Gallup polls keep expressing their admiration for her.

We are three years away from 2016 -- and time and Hillary Clinton’s narrative are likely to work in her favor.





headline: Atheist Stephen Hawking and Church of Scotland both determined to demonize Israel
byline: By Rabbi Abraham Cooper


I was looking forward to hearing the iconic Stephen Hawking, the internationally renowned English theoretical physicist as he helped celebrate Shimon Peres’ 90th birthday at next month’s annual “Facing Tomorrow” Presidential Conference in Jerusalem.

The conference gathers the world’s top leaders and intellectuals for discussions on everything from science and technology to religion and politics. Past attendees have included former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Google founder Sergei Brin, former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales.

And what a great choice it was. To hear from a man who has continued to make his indelible mark on the world despite suffering from a debilitating form of the neuro-degenerative disease ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease) that has left him completely paralyzed. 

It's interesting that Hawking, who is a principled atheist, has some kindred souls among theologians of the Church of Scotland.

Indeed, some of the technologies that have served as Hawking’s lifeline to the world were developed by INTEL, a company with deep roots in Israel.

But it won’t happen.

After agreeing to deliver the coveted keynote in Jerusalem, the highly unorthodox Hawking, who has visited Israel four times, has caved to the prevailing virulent anti-Israel orthodoxy among the United Kingdom’s elite and announced he’ll boycott because of Palestinian protests.

It's interesting that Hawking, who is a principled atheist, has some kindred souls among theologians of the Church of Scotland.

In their spiritual wisdom, the Church will vote on a report next week entitled: “The Inheritance of Abraham? A Report on the ‘Promised Land.’”

It questions the notion that the Bible "supports an essentially Jewish state of Israel." The report alleges that "increasing number of difficulties and current Israeli policies regarding the Palestinians,” and challenges this viewpoint.

"Possession of any land is clearly conditional,” we are told. “The question that arises is this: Would the Jewish people today have a fairer claim to the land if they dealt justly with the Palestinians?"

Biblical promises about the land of Israel were never intended to be taken literally, or as applying to a defined geographical territory, the report argues.

Instead, it said: "They are a way of speaking about how to live under God so that justice and peace reign, the weak and poor are protected, the stranger is included, and all have a share in the community and a contribution to make to it.

"The 'promised land' in the Bible is not a place, so much as a metaphor of how things ought to be among the people of God. This 'promised land' can be found -- or built -- anywhere.

"The desire of many in the state of Israel to acquire the land of Palestine for the Jewish people is wrong. The fact that the land is currently being taken by settlement expansion, the separation barrier, house clearance, theft and force makes it doubly wrong to seek biblical sanction for this."

"There is guilt among Western Christianity about centuries of anti-Semitism that led to discrimination against the Jews, culminating in the total evil of the Holocaust," it noted with the clear implication that Israeli crimes cancel out earlier Christian sins.

Israel’s behavior "raises particular questions for the Church of Scotland as we seek to respond to the question: "What does the Lord require of you…?"

The paper leaves little to imagination as to how Church members should respond: Demonize and de-legitimize the Jewish State and her Zionist supporters.

Ephraim Borowski, director of the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities, responded for Jews everywhere: "It reads like an Inquisition-era polemic against Jews and Judaism. It is biased, weak on sources, and contradictory. The picture it paints of both Judaism and Israel is barely even a caricature. The arrogance of telling the Jewish people how to interpret Jewish texts and Jewish theology is breathtaking.

"If the church cannot build bridges, can it at least refrain from burning them?"

Apparently not.

The founders of the global Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS) movement's pious but poisonous call to demonize one nation—the Jewish State of Israel, have wrought a miracle of sorts—throwing together Church Elders with the world’s most famous atheist, Stephen Hawking.

Too bad this miracle won’t help a single Palestinian, but will further fan the embers of the world’s oldest hatred: anti-Semitism.





headline: It's time for Holder to resign
byline: By Jay Sekulow


Let’s begin with a dose of common sense: Credible accusations of perjury compromise the authority of law enforcement officers, regardless of their rank. 

Even at the lowest level, law enforcement officials exercise enormous power – holding liberty in their hands as they exercise the discretion of their office, deciding whom to investigate and to prosecute. 

As the saying goes, with great power comes great responsibility. That certainly applies to those at the top – including the attorney general – the nation’s top law enforcement officer.His chief responsibility: upholding the Constitution and the rule of law. And that requires being honest and forthcoming. 

Holder has misled Congress, misled a federal court, and misled the American people.

Attorney General Eric Holder has failed in this responsibility. Simply put, with the First Amendment and press freedom at stake, he misled Congress, misled a federal court, and misled the American people.

To recap: On May 15, 2013, Attorney General Holder told Congress, under oath, the following:

"With regard to the potential prosecution of the press for the disclosure of material, that is not something that I've ever been involved with, heard of, or would think would be a wise policy."

The problem? Attorney General Holder had previously signed an affidavit in support of a search warrant in a criminal leak investigation declaring there was: “probable cause to believe that the reporter [Fox News Chief Washington Correspondent James Rosen] has committed or is committing a violation of section 793(d), as an aider and abettor and/or co-conspirator, to which the materials relate.”

He’s never even been “involved with” the “potential prosecution” of the press, yet he told a federal court that there was “probable cause” to believe that a reporter had committed a crime? How are those messages consistent?

On Monday, the Department of Justice attempted to defend itself, releasing a letter to the House Committee on the Judiciary that drew a distinction between investigations (the subject of the affidavit) and prosecutions (the subject of his testimony). Here’s the key defense:

Ultimately, as you know, although a Grand Jury has charged a government employee with the unauthorized disclosure of classified information, prosecutors have not pursued charges against the reporter. 

At no time during the pendency of the matter – before or after seeking the search warrant – have prosecutors sought approval to bring criminal charges against the reporter.

The attorney general’s testimony before the Committee on May 15, 2013, with respect to the Department’s prosecutions of the unauthorized disclosure of classified information was accurate and consistent with these facts.

This explanation, however, makes little sense in the real world. Remember, Attorney General Holder said that he had not been involved with even the “potential prosecution” of the press, that he had not “heard of” such a potential prosecution, nor would he think it a “wise policy.”

If that was in fact the case, wouldn’t that be materially important information to disclose to a court when seeking a search warrant? If there was no possibility of prosecuting the reporter, why mention the reporter’s potential criminal liability at all? 

In other words, either the attorney general misled the court when it created the impression that its investigation was based on “probable cause” to believe Mr. Rosen committed a crime, or he misled Congress when he minimized the very real significance of the affidavit he signed. 

The attorney general is trying to have it both ways – using the “magic words” necessary to obtain the search warrant he wanted while – much later – attempting to use different (but equally magical) words to escape public accountability for actions that dangerously limit press freedom.

This dissembling may be enough to escape a perjury charge, but it is not enough to maintain the dignity of the office. Nor is it enough to reassure the public that the nation’s chief law enforcement officer should be entrusted with decisions that implicate core constitutional liberties.

Let’s not forget that this is merely his latest offense as attorney general.

He has stonewalled the Fast Furious investigation, he’s been cited for contempt of Congress, and most recently his Department of Justice has launched vast and intrusive investigations of members of the media.

As the Obama administration faces, and investigates, scandal after scandal, it is asking us to rely upon the impartiality and integrity of its Department of Justice. So long as Eric Holder is at the helm it will be impossible to trust its judgment or its conclusions.

The American people deserve an attorney general who is dedicated to upholding the Constitution and the rule of law in a direct and honest manner – not dodging questions, parsing words and misleading Congress and the American people. 

It’s time for Attorney General Holder to resign.





headline: Benghazi is the blank spot in the Obama presidency
byline: By Rich Lowry


On “Fox News Sunday” recently, White House aide Dan Pfeiffer was asked about President Barack Obama’s whereabouts the night of the Sept. 11 attack in Benghazi.

This was the night when we lost our first ambassador in 30 years, and when three other Americans were killed in an attack lasting for hours at multiple locations. Since the president is commander in chief, one would think that where he was and what he did during such an event would be of obvious public concern.

Not according to Pfeiffer. He deemed the president’s location, and specifically whether he was in the Situation Room, “a largely irrelevant fact.” If it is so unimportant, why not simply tell us? It’s not as if we haven’t heard largely irrelevant information before.

Obama’s actions and nonactions on that terrible night are a blank spot in his presidency. We simply don’t know much about them, and the White House has always been perfectly content to leave it that way.

To continue reading Rich Lowry's New York Post column on this topic, click here.





headline: Obama's Benghazi woes won't end unless he comes clean
byline: By Karl Rove


President Obama may think the dispute over his handling of Benghazi is a “sideshow,” but his remarks Monday at the joint press briefing with British Prime Minister Cameron are evidence that his administration misled the American people and is trying to do so even today.

For example, in just one paragraph consisting of two sentences, Mr. Obama contradicted himself twice. Mid-way through one his lengthy non-answer, the president said:

“Keep in mind, by the way, these so-called talking points that were prepared for Susan Rice five, six days after the event occurred pretty much matched the assessments that I was receiving at that time in my presidential daily briefing. And keep in mind that two to three days after Susan Rice appeared on the Sunday shows, using these talking points, which have been the source of all this controversy, I sent up the head of our National Counterterrorism Center, Matt Olsen, up to Capitol Hill and specifically said it was an act of terrorism and that extremist elements inside of Libya had been involved in it.”

Let’s unpack these two sentences. First, Mr. Obama claims that his briefing from the CIA put the blame for the Benghazi attack on an anti-Muslim YouTube video, even though we know that (a) the video had nothing to do with the attack in Benghazi and (b) no mention of the videos appeared in any version of the talking points.

The president is getting deeper into trouble.  He must come clean by revealing who directed the CIA to remove the language about terrorism

So precisely who pinned the blame for the attacks on the video? And will the president reveal his intelligence briefings to an investigative committee to prove that the final talking points tracked what the intelligence community was telling him?

In addition, if the president’s press conference statement is true – that he and his top aides were saying right after Benghazi that these were Islamist-inspired terrorist attacks – then why did a September 20, 2012 New York Times story begin this way?

“The White House is now calling the assault on the American diplomatic facility in Benghazi, Libya, a ‘terrorist attack.’”

“It is self-evident that what happened in Benghazi was a terrorist attack,” the White House press secretary, Jay Carney, told reporters aboard Air Force One on Thursday. ‘Our embassy was attacked violently and the result was four deaths of American officials.’

“Until now, White House officials have not used that language in describing the assault.”

And why were the following (accurate) phrases excised from the CIA’s original draft of the talking points:

…as to who is responsible for the violence, although the crowd almost certainly was a mix of individuals. That being said, there are indications that Islamic extremists participated in the violent demonstrations. 

The wide availability of weapons and experienced fighters in Libya almost certainly contribute to the lethality of the attacks.

The Agency has produced numerous pieces of the threat of extremists linked to al-Qa'ida in Benghazi and eastern Libya. Since April, there have been at least five other attacks against foreign interests in Benghazi by unidentified assailants, including the June attack against the British Ambassador's convoy. We cannot rule out the individuals has [sic] previously surveilled the U.S. facilities, also contributing to the efficacy of the attacks

It certainly appears as if on Saturday, September 15, someone in the administration told the Deputy Director of the CIA to delete these words from the draft talking points.

We don’t yet know who this was, but we need to find out. And you can bet that individual was not a press aide like the State Department press spokeswoman or the communication guy at the National Security Council.

It is simply bizarre for Mr. Obama to suggest the CIA would chuck its early, accurate findings and instead (falsely) inform him that the Benghazi attack was a simple spontaneous reaction to an anti-Muslim video.

Second, Mr. Obama says after Ambassador Rice made the round of five Sunday morning talk programs to sell the blame-it-on-the-video line, that he, the commander-in-chief, sent Matt Olsen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center “up to Capitol Hill…specifically” to say “it was an act of terrorism and that extremist elements inside of Libya had been involved in it.”

If that were in fact the case, then why was Ms. Rice, the most visible and prominent administration spokesperson on this matter, telling the American people something utterly at odds with what Mr. Olsen was telling members of Congress?

As he is prone to do, Mr. Obama constantly misstated the facts Monday. For example, he said “congressional committees” had “reviewed” administration emails about the evolution of the talking points “several months ago” and “concluded that, in fact, there was nothing afoul in terms of the process that we had used.”

That’s certainly not what we heard last week. Just when did which congressional committee clear the administration on preparation of the talking points?

The president is getting deeper into trouble. He must come clean by revealing who directed the CIA to remove the language about terrorism and who authorized that person or persons to so direct the CIA.

He must disclose who prepared Susan Rice for the Sunday morning talk programs and directed her to say something that they knew at the time was untrue. And the president must explain to us, fully and in detail, why he was still wrongly blaming the attacks on the YouTube video weeks after they had taken place.Because the president’s strategy of a modified limited hangout won’t work any longer.



Karl Rove is a Fox News political analyst and a former senior adviser and deputy chief of staff to President George W. Bush. He is the author of "Courage and Consequence: My Life as a Conservative in the Fight" (Threshold Editions, 2010) and helped organize the political action committee American Crossroads.



headline: The only way forward on Syria
byline: By Michael Shank, Kathy Zager


United States-Russia diplomacy is finally making headway on Syria. Monday, as U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov met in Paris to discuss their joint proposal for peace talks, they were encouraged by news over the weekend that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad will attend the talks. 

If all goes according to plan, next month's peace conference in Geneva will bring together the Syrian government and opposition leaders to broker a ceasefire and establish a transitional government. 

We are finally witnessing the kind of U.S. diplomatic engagement that is desperately needed in the region, irrespective of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's vote last week to arm Syrian rebels, a decision which directly undermines diplomacy efforts.

We must engage every nation that has a stake in Syria, whether it’s Iran, Israel, or Lebanon, not just Russia, Turkey and Iraq.

For too long we have disengaged -- recalling our ambassadors from Damascus when we needed them most -- a strategy that has left the U.S.-Syria diplomatic relationship woefully weak, manifested little in terms of peaceful progress, and ultimately failed at preventing violent conflict.

Nevertheless, the solution to the Syrian crisis does not lie in a U.S. military intervention, despite what many in Congress are calling for.

Instead, Congress should be backing the best possibility of peace presently on the table: a negotiated settlement among Syrian regime officials, internal factions and other regional actors in the conflict.

The goal of next month's conference in Geneva is a transitional government with members chosen by mutual consent. 

Secretary Kerry should have a green light from the Obama administration to offer a comprehensive diplomatic settlement among all parties, while continuing to offer generous humanitarian aid to millions in need.

This is how we make headway. And it is critical that these diplomatic efforts include sustained communication with all who are party to the conflict. That means we must engage every nation that has a stake in Syria, whether it’s Iran, Israel, or Lebanon, not just Russia, Turkey and Iraq.

Going forward, there are three particular avenues we must pursue:

First, the U.S. diplomatic agenda with Iran should be broadened beyond the nuclear issue to address the crisis in Syria.

Iran has critical influence on the Syrian regime and could play a strong role in getting Bashar al-Assad and his government to accept a political transition. We’ve rightly engaged Russia at the highest levels of statecraft. Now we must engage Iran similarly. Until all key actors are included at the negotiating table, the present political tensions will only escalate.

Second, if the U.S. is serious about supporting diplomatic engagement, the U.S. should push for a rapid and seamless replacement of Lakhdar Brahimi, the U.N.-Arab League envoy for Syria who has indicated he will resign from his position this month. To leave this post vacant will send the wrong message to Damascus about the U.S.’s commitment to diplomacy and would weaken the diplomatic effort.

Third, the U.S. should offer generous humanitarian aid to accountable actors. Our priority in Syria should be to ease the suffering of Syrian civilians. At least 6.8 million are currently in need of humanitarian assistance.

Proposals from Senator John McCain and others to administer aid through the Syrian Opposition Coalition would be disastrous, however, as it politicizes the aid and further endangers civilians.

It is essential that humanitarian aid be politically neutral, and it must be delivered to impartial humanitarian organizations.

These three areas are where Washington should spend its energy and effort. And yet, the drumbeat for war proceeds apace, not unlike it did with Libya, with some in Congress calling for the same military aid and the same no-fly zone.

Military intervention -- whether through a U.S.-enforced no-fly zone over Syria, U.S. troops on the ground, or arming of the opposition -- would undoubtedly escalate the bloodshed. Further militarizing the conflict would destabilize an already volatile region, and it would undermine the potential for successful diplomacy. 

As former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has pointed out, imposing a no-fly zone is technically and effectively an act of war. 

Establishing a no-fly zone would begin with the U.S. bombing Syria’s anti-aircraft system. Given the widespread presence of Syria’s anti-aircraft systems, this would severely endanger millions of already-vulnerable civilians.

The only way forward at this point is through engagement of all of Syria’s neighbors including Iran, continuing high-level U.N. diplomacy post-Brahimi, and assisting civilians with humanitarian aid, but only through trusted impartial international aid organizations. These are the next--and only--steps. Any other option comes with too much risk and too much additional bloodshed -- and would not leave behind a stable, strong, or safe Syria.



Michael Shank is director of foreign policy at the Friends Committee on National Legislation.





headline: The black attack on Obama
byline: By Juan Williams


When President Obama told a black audience years ago that black men needed to be better fathers the response from Rev. Jesse Jackson was to criticize him for talking down to black people and whisper that he deserved to be castrated.

Now the president has done it again.

Speaking at graduation ceremonies at Morehouse College in Atlanta last weekend the President said it is time to stop using racism and discrimination – though they still exist – to excuse bad personal decisions that block success.

Just three times in his presidency has Mr. Obama spoken to the crisis facing black America head-on. Yet to some ears he is now a “scold.”

And the critics are back at President Obama again.

Left-wing black intellectuals are calling him a “scold” and asking if he is making a bad habit of speaking to the black community’s flaws. In other words, he is blaming the victim and not speaking to systemic issues from ghettoes to bad schools that continue to disadvantage poor black people.

Black people deserve more than “targeted scorn,” from the president, wrote Ta-Nehisi Coates for the Atlantic. Coates chided the president for telling a black male audience to stop making excuses when the president didn’t offer a similar reprimand when he spoke to the mostly white female audience at last year’s graduation ceremonies at Barnard College.

“Taking the full measure of the Obama presidency thus far,” Coates wrote, “it is hard to avoid coming to the conclusion that the White House has one way of addressing social ills that afflict black people -- particularly black youth -- and another of addressing everyone else.”

The Washington Post, in a news story, reported that several black opinion leaders are “weary” of the president’s message. And the Post reporter even raised suspicions that “many in the black community” think the speech was not for a black audience but “to make himself politically palpable to white voters.”

This backlash this time is not as chilling as a threat of castration. But the awful and powerful message is the same: Black leaders will have their blackness questioned if they dare speak out on the dysfunction in black America. They are not supposed to air dirty laundry by speaking the crisis of fatherless children, high rates of poverty, tragic drop-out rates and incarceration that weigh on black progress and constitute the major challenge to black America in this generation.

The heart of the critique is why doesn’t he target the “ social ills” in other communities?

The simple answer is no other population is dealing with 80 percent out of wedlock births. And as none other than First Lady Michelle Obama pointed out at the Bowie State University on May 17, “one in three African American students are dropping out of high school. Only one in five African Americans between the ages of 25 and 29 has gotten a college degree.”

The only criticism the president deserves is for not speaking to this national tragedy more regularly.

His only other recent remarks on this crisis in black America came after a young woman who performed with her school group at his second inaugural was killed by gunfire in Chicago, a city with an abysmal rate of black on black crime.

That is it. Three times in his presidency has the president spoken to this crisis head-on. Yet to some ears he is now a “Scold.”

When the president is given a bullhorn and put on national television every day to compete with the gangster rappers, the crass comedians and the tattoo-covered thug life characters will he begin to approach becoming a “scold.”

The truth is that President Obama is speaking in the voice of authentic black leaders. At Morehouse he mentioned Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washington, Thurgood Marshall and Dr. King as men who felt the sting of racism in their lives but “had no time for excuses” when it came to “their own accomplishments and sense of purpose.”

In that tradition he spoke inspiring words to the young men, advising them “if you keep on your grind and get other folks to do the same – nobody can stop you.”

At the end of his remarks the president called attention to a young man who was taken from his mother as a boy, grew up in foster care and yet graduated from Morehouse with honors and gained admission to Harvard Law School. The young man wants to use his skills to improve the foster care system.

That is not a “scold.” That is holding up a shining example of a black man rising above potentially crippling circumstances. The inspiring example is for all people, but especially other young black Americans who might be tempted to give into all the cultural cues that invite excuses for not succeeding.

The president acknowledged that racism and discrimination are a fact of life even today but standing there as the first black President said the age of excuses is slipping away as people from China, Brazil and around the world, often born to less privilege than poor Americans, find a way to compete and succeed.

How is that a political message for white people? How is that anything but the most important message that a responsible black man, a responsible president of any color, could deliver to black America today?





headline: Did Holder mislead Congress about targeting reporters like James Rosen?
byline: By Karl Rove


In his speech at the National Defense University Thursday, President Obama said, “Journalists should not be at legal risk for doing their jobs. Our focus must be on those who break the law.”

Maybe it’s time for the president to have a heart-to-heart with his attorney general, Eric Holder.

NBC News is reporting that Mr. Holder “signed off on a controversial search warrant that identified Fox News reporter James Rosen as a ‘possible co-conspirator’ in violations of the Espionage Act and authorized seizure of his private emails,” per NBC conversations with a law enforcement official.

Eric Holder might have recently misled Congress in a profound way.  Some might even say he lied.

In the case of the government’s subpoena for the phone records of as many as 100 Associated Press editors and writers, Mr. Holder left the decision for a deputy to make after he recused himself. 

But if NBC News is right, then the attorney general himself green-lighted the FBI to seek a subpoena for Mr. Rosen’s private emails in the spring of 2010.

If true, then Mr. Holder has a difficulty. He might have recently misled Congress in a profound way. Some might even say he lied.

On May 15, before the House Judiciary Committee, Congressman Hank Johnson (D-Ga.) asked the attorney general, “We also have an old law that would allow for prosecution of anyone who published the classified information, isn’t that correct?”

In the course of a rambling answer, Mr. Holder said, “You've got a long way to go to try to prosecute people—the press for the publication of that material. This has...not fared well in American history." 

So far, so good: Mr. Obama and Mr. Holder apparently agree. "The focus should be on those people who break their oath and put the American people at risk, not reporters who gather this information. That should not be the focus...of these investigations," the attorney general went on to say.

But Mr. Holder also proclaimed, "With regard to the potential prosecution of the press for the disclosure of material, that is not something I've ever been involved in, heard of, or would think would be wise policy."

But that’s exactly what the government was trying to do in the case of James Rosen, then a Fox News reporter on the State Department beat, now Fox News’ chief Washington correspondent. 

The FBI sought Mr. Rosen’s phone records and private emails because they alleged there was “probable cause to believe” Mr. Rosen was a “co-conspirator and/or aider and abettor…committing the criminal offense…”

If NBC is right and Mr. Holder approved going after Mr. Rosen, then the attorney general has a lot of explaining to do to Congress. 

House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte might well want to ask Mr. Holder to appear again and explain why he said targeting journalists was “not something I've ever been involved in, heard of, or would think would be wise policy” after he had heard of it, had been involved in it, and had signed off on it as a matter of policy.



Karl Rove is a Fox News political analyst and a former senior adviser and deputy chief of staff to President George W. Bush. He is the author of "Courage and Consequence: My Life as a Conservative in the Fight" (Threshold Editions, 2010) and helped organize the political action committee American Crossroads.



headline: Five tried and true ways to connect with your teen
byline: By Brenda Garrison


Building a relationship with your teen may seem futile and dangerous. After all, you’re not even sure if this is still your kid.

He vaguely looks like the adorable lad in his kindergarten picture, but long gone is the precious way he used to chatter on with you.

Now if you get a grunt or two from him before he leaves for school you feel you’ve had meaningful conversation.

And the daughter who used to care for her American Girl doll like it was a miniature version of herself—well, her moods go up and down at breakneck speed.

Even though our kids act like they’d rather have acne than have us involved in their lives, it’s just that—an act. 

No matter what you do, you are the bad guy and the cause of all her problems. Yep, building a relationship with this strange teenager who calls you “Mom” or “Dad” can be frustrating.

While it would be easier to check out as a parent in these teen years (and many parents do), we will be missing priceless opportunities to influence our kids and build relationships that will last a lifetime.

Even though our kids act like they’d rather have acne than have us involved in their lives, it’s just that—an act.

My daughter Katie (now 26 and a former teen rebel) said, “It was really nice to have my parents at my band events for support and to know in case I needed anything they where there.”

Hanging in there with our kids in these teens years will not only build relationships for a lifetime, but it will help keep our kids from making even worse decisions than if we weren’t there.

Here are a few ways to build a relationship with your teen:

1. Love and accept your child where she is. Do you, or have you ever had, someone in your life that you could never please no matter how hard you tried?

If you have (and who hasn’t), you know the frustration of giving your best and yet it’s never enough.

Our teens live in a social mine field every day. They do their best with their limited maturity and reasoning abilities.

But in our eyes it can look like they’re failing miserably. I’m not saying we shouldn’t have reasonable expectations for our kids. But I am saying even when they fall short, love and accept them right where they are.

2. Stop nagging. Again, how effective is it when your spouse or boss or parents nag you? Does it make you want to do what they want you to do? Usually the exact opposite.

After Katie moved out, we were always thrilled when she came home for a visit. However, she would drop all her stuff right inside the back door.

I started to nag her but then I realized I didn’t want her to not visit because I nagged her about her stuff. So I moved it to her room without saying a word.

She later confessed when I stopped nagging she started moving it on her own because I was no longer making it a big deal.

Sure, our teens need to learn personal responsibility. When the kids all lived at home I used to give them until the end of the day to pick up their stuff. What was left lying around I collected in a bag and it cost them to buy it back. No nagging required.

3. Keep the wheels on the wagon. Encourage your child’s good decisions and successes. Help and enable your child in the positive things you see in their lives.

Once Katie became serious about finishing college, we had plenty of opportunities to encourage and advise (when asked).

She is a sculpture major, so my husband, Gene, has helped her build many supportive structures to hold her forms.

It’s a practical way he can help. What’s a positive thing your child is involved with? How can you keep the wheels on his wagon and keep it rolling down the street to his future?

4. Maximize technology appropriately. I love texting! It keeps me in contact with my girls without being invasive. My girls respond in their time. I text information that needs to be communicated, encouragement, and even funny pictures of the cat.

The key is don’t overuse it. Don’t text back, “Did you get my text?” if you don’t get a response. Also, remember that your Facebook page is just that—your Facebook page. Never post a picture of your kids or something about them without their permission.

5. Be available. Be home when your kids are home. Yes, they’re old enough to stay alone, but you never know when they’ll be ready to talk. You also never know when they’ve had a really bad day and need to talk.

Your presence gives them security, stability, and comfort. It tells our kids “You’re important to me. I’m here for you.”

Katie agrees, “In everything, my parents’ presence gave me an ongoing feeling of emotional and real security—knowing they were available to listen/talk and actually available if I needed help. ”

Building relationship with your teenager is difficult and often you won’t see results for years. Stay the course. Gene and I now enjoy being part of our adult children’s lives where we are loved and valued.





headline: Job growth rebounds in April but there's trouble ahead
byline: By Peter Morici


The Labor Department announced Friday that the U.S. economy created 165,000 jobs in April, and the unemployment rate slipped a notch to 7.5 percent. That’s better than March but hardly enough—getting unemployment down to 6 percent over the next three years would require 365,000 jobs a month, and that is not likely to happen.

Adding in discouraged adults and part-time workers who want full-time jobs, the unemployment rate becomes 13.9 percent. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of young college graduates face years working at businesses like Starbucks and may never get on the ladder to a meaningful career.

Slow growth is the big culprit: Forty five months into the economic recovery, growth has averaged a subpar 2.1 percent. Growth closer to 3 percent is needed to pull down unemployment without chasing adults out of the workforce and sentencing well educated young people to low-skilled employment, but the President and Congress are taking the country in the wrong direction.

Forty five months into the economic recovery, growth has averaged a subpar 2.1 percent.

Defense cutbacks negotiated with Congress during President Obama’s first term have sliced some $62 billion from federal spending since last fall.

Tax increases enacted in January and triggered by sequestration in March will further reduce household purchasing power and government spending by another $200 billion in the second and third quarters of this year.

Together, those policies will kill about 4 million jobs over the next 3 years.

With southern Europe’s depression spreading to Germany and other northern states, the prospects for U.S. exports and cut-priced competition from Europe in U.S. markets is heating up—growth and jobs creation could stay depressed for a long time.

A bounty of inexpensive natural gas, rising wages in China, and dysfunctional government policies in Europe and Japan makes the United States a more attractive location for manufacturing. However, new factories will require very few workers—engineers have applied the wizardry of handheld devices to factory automation with amazing results.

It is hard to imagine the Federal Reserve could do more to support growth. Already, it is buying virtually all the new mortgage back securities and 70 percent of the new federal debt issued each month.

This is keeping interest rates at record lows and boosting new home construction; however, it penalizes the elderly who rely on CDs and fixed-income investments and reduces their spending on goods and services.

Many cash strapped elderly have returned to work, often taking jobs from younger workers.

Stronger growth would help and is possible. Forty-five months into the Reagan recovery, GDP was advancing at a 5.2 percent annual pace—nowadays, that pace would bring unemployment down pretty quickly.

More rapid growth requires importing less and exporting more—dealing with the $450 billion trade deficit on oil, by drilling more offshore and in Alaska, and with China, by addressing its undervalued currency and protectionism.

Faster growth also requires right sizing business regulations to make investing in new jobs less expensive and time consuming. Regulatory enforcement is needed to protect the environment, consumers and financial stability but must be delivered cost effectively and quickly to add genuine value.

Overall, more jobs for more Americans would require trimming back on tax increases and spending cuts, and encouraging more pro-growth trade, energy and regulatory policies.





headline: Obama thinks we won the War on Terror and it's time to move on
byline: By K.T. McFarland


President Obama delivered what was billed by the White House as a “major” speech on national security Thursday at the historic National Defense University. In short, Mr. Obama thinks the War on Terror is over, and he won it. There may be a few final details to mop about, but it's time to move on to more important things.

The speech was typical of Mr. Obama: Open with a broad sweep of history from the beginning of the republic to today.

Follow that with a laundry list of all the great things he has done to reverse the bad things his predecessor did.

Brush failures under the rug, blame them on others, or marks them as the inevitable course of history.

Maybe Thursday's speech wasn't so much about foreign policy as domestic politics.

Then finish with uplifting rhetoric, adding in a dash about the greatness of America. 

You walk away feeling you’ve been at a great meal but are somehow still hungry. The problem is there wasn’t much meat on those bones. 

The only new thing the president did discuss was his drone policy and targeted killings. Even then, he didn't clarify much.

On the one hand, the president said drone strikes have killed “dozens of skilled Al Qaeda” fighters and taken them off the battlefield. Mr.Obama claims drone strikes are legal, effective and save American lives since we don’t have to put our boots on the ground. From that you'd assume drone killings are here to stay -- we kill bad guys at no risk to ourselves.

But on the other hand the president wants to limit their use --and turn to them only if there is no chance of capturing the terrorists, and only if no civilians will be hurt. Under those circumstances it's hard to see us ever using drone strikes again. 

Frankly, it's a muddle.

If the drone strikes have been as effective as Mr. Obama claims, why are there more terrorists in more places than before as has Al Qaeda and its affiliates have set up shop in new countries? And if Al Qaeda has spread, why limit the drone strikes?

It’s as if the more drone strikes we have, the larger Al Qaeda grows. Maybe they’re not connected, but it certainly adds more confusion than ever about Team Obama's drone policy.

As for the rest of the speech, there was nothing new. He gave the boilerplate Obama talking points. 

- He ended the Iraq War and is winding down in Afghanistan. 

- He killed Usama bin Laden, and decimated Al Qaeda's core leadership.

- He wants to try terrorists in civilian courts and close Gitmo, but Congress won't let him.

- He has repaired America’s alliances and restored our standing in the world. America is safer because of Obama.

So why did Mr. Obama give this speech? And why did the White House bill it as a major foreign policy address, the first one of his second term? 

Why give a speech that focused on smaller issues like drone strikes and Gitmo, but avoided completely the bigger issues of nuclear proliferation, Iran and the Middle East?

Maybe Thursday's speech wasn't so much about foreign policy as domestic politics.Maybe it was an attempt to divert attention away from the scandals of Benghazi, the IRS, the targeting of the AP and now Fox News that have dominated the headlines and threaten to derail Mr. Obama's second term agenda.

It wasn’t much of a success as a foreign policy speech. But it was a complete failure as a political diversion.





headline: George W. Bush's vision's for health
byline: By Dr. Marc Siegel


Do you ever wonder how long our current president of the United States will continue to blame the prior administration for our current economy and blame the Iraq War for our current foreign policy concerns?

For a study in contrasts, I spent some time last week with our most recent former president, George W. Bush, mountain biking on his pastoral ranch in Crawford, Texas with former and current soldiers -- referred to as "warriors."

The grounds of the ranch are gorgeous, with many sections restored to native Texas prairie by Mrs. Bush and 43 miles of mountain bike trail built by President Bush and his biking experts.

President Bush believes the key to preventing disease is to stay fit.

While I was there I got to know a humble, thoughtful, caring man with a scathing wit (when I took of my shirt he acted horrified), who always takes the high road, refuses to directly criticize his predecessor, and also declines to take personal credit for successes that occurred during his administration.

I interviewed him about the future of health care in the U.S., and it quickly became apparent that his philosophy and focus differs from our government’s current emphasis on entitlements.

Though he wouldn’t criticize President Obama or ObamaCare directly, he told me he believes in “ preventing disease by staying fit. If people make better choices than the demand for health care will decline.”

That wisdom sounds simple until you consider that most of America’s expensive chronic health problems including heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, cancer, and stroke are directly linked to inactivity and weight.

President Bush by contrast is 66-years-old but looks much younger because of his physical fitness. He laughed when I asked him if he suffered from premature aging associated with the presidency. “No, I really don’t. I’m riding better than I’ve ever ridden in a long time and I feel younger, I think it’s all in the mind,” he said. “If you don’t eat well, if you don’t exercise, if you don’t sleep well you, are going to feel older.”

Bush praised our health care system as “the best, most modern, most technically advanced health care system in the world.”

His optimism and belief in America’s greatness is infectious. He also said he believes that “eventually we will figure out the most efficient way to pay for it.”

It was clear that he believes that preventing disease by staying fit is the place to start, but emphasized, “there’s no law you can pass to get people off the couch."

Bush’s emphasis is on a personal responsibility for health rather than extending an expensive, easily overused and comprehensive insurance program to more and more people.

“If people are held responsible for their behavior they might help effect behavioral change,” he said to me as we spoke following the bike ride. He emphasized the need for health savings accounts and the use of market forces to help ensure that “the individual will realize the benefits of a healthy choice.”

I asked President Bush about PEPFAR (President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief), a very successful program initiated in 2003 which has helped bring life-saving retroviral treatments to millions of people in Africa and other underdeveloped countries.

Characteristically, the former president wouldn’t take personal credit for it, “Well it happened during my administration,” he said humbly,”I view it as an American initiative and I wish the American people could see the joy and the faces of people who’s lives have been saved as a result of our aid.”

With funding now in jeopardy, President Bush emphasized the initiative’s importance. “The key thing for our congress to recognize is that the program has been successful ... it’s saving lives, and if structured properly, the program can serve as a bridge with these African countries to develop their own health care systems and their own funding,” he said.

At the conclusion of his 100 kilometer mountain bike ride, President Bush stood close to me in the wind and mist of a rainy Texas day on his 1,500 acre ranch under the awning of a tent constructed on the helicopter landing area.

I understood that he is a man very comfortable with himself and others.

He looked into the distance, exploring his vision for the future of HIV disease, a scourge which consumed my early days as a physician and has cost us so many lives worldwide.

“We are close to not only reversing the infection but giving stability on the continent of Africa which I think is important for our national security and for our moral conscience and I hope people in Congress recognize that and will not shortchange the program.”

I knew he was right. Bush's vision of a healthy America was connected to his vision of a healthy world.





headline: Heidi Klum's right -- we should pay our kids to eat healthy food
byline: By Jessica Gottlieb


When a girlfriend called me yesterday to say, “Oh My Gawd have you heard that Heidi Klum pays her kids to eat healthy foods?” I replied, “Oh that’s genius.” and then the phone went really quiet and I was like, “Was that not the answer you were expecting?”

Since nature (and cell phones) abhor a vacuum I took the silence as an invitation to not quite lecture, but rather to expound on my enthusiasm for paying kids to eat healthily.

You see just a few days ago USC published a study demonstrating the import of good habits during times of stress. It found that during times of stress students are more likely to stick to old behaviors including those like exercise and healthy eating.

Kids don’t love making their beds or brushing their teeth but good parents tie these activities to allowance every day. Why not pay a kid to eat well?

In one experiment researchers followed students over an entire semester including during exams and found that students who were in the habit of eating a healthy breakfast were more likely to stick to routine and ate especially well in the mornings -- even while under pressure.

Armed with this knowledge (and a fist full of common sense) I’ve decided that my children will be raised in a home where I give it my best shot to instill 18 years of healthy habits on them before setting them loose in the world. There’s a lot of exercise around here, there’s healthy food and there’s payment when they do things well.

I pay for grades. When I do good work I get paid. When I do great work I occasionally get a perk or a bonus so I’m not sure that childhood shouldn’t be the same.

If the kids go to school and bring home a bunch of B’s they get to continue to live their above average lifestyle (few chores, lots of freedom, comic books everywhere). If the kids bring home a slate of A’s then they get their bonus check for Mom LLC. It just makes sense.

Recently a 9-year-old girl took Don Thompson, the CEO of McDonalds, to task for tricking kids into thinking that their food is healthy and he replied by telling a 9-year-old child that McDonalds serves fruits and vegetables. They are even thinking of a kiwi on a stick and something that includes pineapple. These are the food wars parents all over America are waging.

So while my kids are fed sweet teas, sodas and ice cream for every celebration at their school I have the opportunity to temper all this sugar by making water the primary drink in our house and fruits and vegetables the go-to snack.

Obesity is our national eating disorder. In the US 68.8% of adults are overweight or obese and 35.7% are obese. And 31.8% of children and adolescents are overweight or obese and 16.9% are obese.

I’m a 43-year-old woman. When I look at my elementary school class photos there aren’t any fat kids. There’s a girl we said was fat, but she’s positively lithe and lean compared to today’s kids.

There’s no time to be delicate about this. America is fat and I’ll be damned if my kids will be weaned on a steady diet of frankenfood and other bad choices.

There are a lot of theories about what makes us fat and it’s unlikely that we’ll find just one cause but it is abundantly clear that healthy eating habits are the vaccine against obesity (and about a zillion other diseases or disorders).

Kids don’t love making their beds, studying for tests or brushing their teeth but good parents tie these activities to allowance every day. Why not pay a kid to eat well?

Here’s the only thing that’s a little weird. According to an article in London's Daily Mail the supermodel and mom pays her kids a dollar to down a healthy fruit smoothie at breakfast. We all know that the Klum kids have basically won the DNA lotto but I’m worried about their business acumen. A dollar for a fruit smoothie? The only thing I’d get for a dollar around here is an eye roll.





headline: Europe's Great Depression
byline: By Peter Morici


The whole of Europe is headed for a permanent recession—a depression. Austerity and labor market reforms can’t save it.

Radical measures--abandoning the euro and big deficit spending in Germany--are the only way out.

Unemployment exceeds Great Depression levels in Spain, many parts of Greece, Portugal and Italy, and is rising in northern Europe. Slashing government spending and labor market reforms have neither restored Club Med economies nor their governments to solvency.

Across much of Europe GDP is shrinking faster than governments can cut spending, and sovereign debt burdens are becoming worse, not better.

In the south, labor market reforms can only work if those are decisive enough to change investor’s perceptions and export opportunities abound to sell what new factories could make.

Europe’s entitlement culture makes swift reform politically impossible, and the Club Med states’ economic troubles have spread to their natural export markets—the German and other northern economies are contracting too.

Across much of Europe GDP is shrinking faster than governments can cut spending, and sovereign debt burdens are becoming worse, not better.

For Club Med governments, stimulus won’t work either. They can’t increase borrowing and spending fast enough to boost their economies without panicking bond investors and instigating a pan-European financial crisis.

What should keep Chancellor Angela Merkel awake at night is if southern Europe completely collapses, Germany and the other northern states, lacking southern markets for their exports, will be thrust into a permanent recession, too— and then all of Europe would be gripped by depression.

Then it’s either draconian austerity and double digit unemployment for Germany and other northern states too or investors will desert their bonds too. 

The European Central Bank would either have to preside over the demise of the euro or print enough money to finance governments and set off hyper-inflation—Europe would be gripped by double digit inflation and unemployment.

What technocrats behind Merkel’s extreme austerity prescriptions for southern Europe won’t acknowledge is that a significant measure of German and northern Europe economic success is premised on exporting to the south and amassing trade surpluses.

Simple math requires the Mediterranean states to have corresponding trade deficits as long as those are locked inside the euro and can’t devalue their currencies to escape.

Those trade deficits must be financed by borrowing from the north—either by their governments spending and borrowing too much, as Rome and Athens did prior to their crises, or their banks finance real estate bubbles, as Madrid permitted prior to the global financial collapse.

Once that borrowing is constrained—as the austerity imposed by Germany in exchange for aid now requires—German and other northern economies lose their export markets and sink into recession.

That is happening right now—GDP is contracting in Germany, France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Austria, and Finland.

The only option left is for Germany and the others to boost government spending and deficits to stimulate their economies, export less, and import more from the south—permit trade to balance between the north and south and get Europe on a more sustainable path. German politics make voluntarily abandoning mercantilism virtually impossible.

Prior to the euro, the European Union thrived without permanent unemployment throughout the Mediterranean states. But now the single currency has locked in high labor costs in the south and made their recessions permanent.

A return to national currencies would permit Italy, Spain and the others to devalue to make their exports more attractive in Germany and other northern states and rebalance trade and growth in ways the German politicians can’t or won’t.

Europe is slipping into a depression—with unemployment and stagnation reaching levels not seen since the 1930s.

Nothing can save it other than abandoning extreme austerity, labor market reforms too rapid for national politics to support, and a single currency that delivers economic decay and depravation to large portions of the continent.

When high unemployment in Europe brings voters to their senses, then abandoning the euro and realism about the prosperity and security governments can guarantee may bring Europe back.

Nothing less will do.





headline: An assault on freedom of the press
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


The firestorm commenced by the revelation of the execution of a search warrant on the personal email server of my Fox News colleague James Rosen continues to rage, and the conflagration engulfing the First Amendment continues to burn; and it is the Department of Justice itself that is fanning the flames.

As we know from recent headlines, in the spring of 2010, the DOJ submitted an affidavit to a federal judge in Washington, D.C., in which an FBI agent swore under oath that Rosen was involved in a criminal conspiracy to release classified materials, and in the course of that conspiracy, he aided and abetted a State Department vendor in actually releasing them. The precise behavior that the FBI and the DOJ claimed was criminal was Rosen’s use of “flattery” and his appeals to the “vanity” of Stephen Wen-Ho Kim, the vendor who had a security clearance. The affidavit persuaded the judge to issue a search warrant for Rosen’s personal email accounts that the feds had sought.

The government’s theory of the case was that the wording of Rosen’s questions to Kim facilitated Kim’s release of classified materials, and Rosen therefore bore some of the criminal liability for Kim’s answers to Rosen’s questions. Kim has since been indicted for the release of classified information (presumably to Rosen), a charge that he vigorously denies. Rosen has not been charged, and the DOJ has said it does not intend to do so.

The government knew that Rosen committed no crime -- not as a conspirator nor as an aider and abettor -- by asking Kim for his opinion on the likely North Korean response to the then-pending U.N. condemnations of North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile tests. By telling a federal judge, however, that Rosen somehow was criminally complicit in the release of classified information by the manner in which he put questions to Kim, the DOJ substantially misled the judge into signing a search warrant, which, when executed, would enable the feds to read Rosen’s private emails. Then, by reading them the feds were led to Fox News telephone numbers in New York City and in Washington, which they since have acknowledged they have monitored.

When asked at a congressional hearing just two weeks ago on May 15 to address this, Attorney General Eric Holder replied: “With regard to the potential prosecution of the press for the disclosure of material, that is not something that I have ever been involved in, heard of or would think would be a wise policy.” 

Whether under oath or not, because Holder spoke in his official capacity before a congressional committee in its official capacity, he was legally bound to tell the truth and legally bound not to mislead the committee. Last Thursday, President Obama in a speech on national security stated, “Journalists should not be at legal risk for doing their jobs. Our focus must be on those who break the law.” The next day, the DOJ leaked to NBC News the inconvenient truth that Holder had personally authorized seeking the search warrant for Rosen’s personal emails; and over the long holiday weekend, the DOJ confirmed that.

What’s going on here? Isn’t the Attorney General bound by the same laws to tell the truth as the rest of us are? Doesn’t the First Amendment protect from criminal prosecution and government harassment those who ask questions in pursuit of the truth?

The answers to these questions are obvious and well grounded. One of Holder’s predecessors, Nixon administration Attorney General John Mitchell, went to federal prison after he was convicted of lying to Congress. The same Attorney General who told Congress he had “not been involved” in the Rosen search warrant before the DOJ he runs revealed that he not only was involved, he personally approved the decision to seek the search warrant, must know that the Supreme Court ruled that reporters have an absolute right to ask any questions they want of any source they can find. The same case held that they cannot be punished or harassed because the government doesn’t like the answers given to their questions. And the same case held that the if answers concern a matter in which the public is likely to have a material interest, they can legally be published, even if they contain state secrets.

The whole purpose of the First Amendment is to permit open, wide, robust, even unfettered debate about the government. That debate cannot he held in an environment in which reporters can be surveilled by the government because of their flattery. And the government cannot serve the people it was elected to serve when its high-ranking officials can lie to or mislead the congressional committees before which they have given testimony.

The great baseball pitcher Roger Clemens spent a few million dollars successfully defending himself against charges brought by Holder’s DOJ, which accused him of doing what Holder himself has arguably done. Is this the government you expect in a free society? Is this what you expect from the government in a free society? And when reporters clam up because they don’t like the feds breathing down their necks when they reveal inconvenient -- or even innocuous -- truths about the government, don’t we all suffer in our ignorance?





headline: Job growth rebounds in April but there's trouble ahead
byline: By Peter Morici


The Labor Department announced Friday that the U.S. economy created 165,000 jobs in April, and the unemployment rate slipped a notch to 7.5 percent. That’s better than March but hardly enough—getting unemployment down to 6 percent over the next three years would require 365,000 jobs a month, and that is not likely to happen.

Adding in discouraged adults and part-time workers who want full-time jobs, the unemployment rate becomes 13.9 percent. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of young college graduates face years working at businesses like Starbucks and may never get on the ladder to a meaningful career.

Slow growth is the big culprit: Forty five months into the economic recovery, growth has averaged a subpar 2.1 percent. Growth closer to 3 percent is needed to pull down unemployment without chasing adults out of the workforce and sentencing well educated young people to low-skilled employment, but the President and Congress are taking the country in the wrong direction.

Forty five months into the economic recovery, growth has averaged a subpar 2.1 percent.

Defense cutbacks negotiated with Congress during President Obama’s first term have sliced some $62 billion from federal spending since last fall.

Tax increases enacted in January and triggered by sequestration in March will further reduce household purchasing power and government spending by another $200 billion in the second and third quarters of this year.

Together, those policies will kill about 4 million jobs over the next 3 years.

With southern Europe’s depression spreading to Germany and other northern states, the prospects for U.S. exports and cut-priced competition from Europe in U.S. markets is heating up—growth and jobs creation could stay depressed for a long time.

A bounty of inexpensive natural gas, rising wages in China, and dysfunctional government policies in Europe and Japan makes the United States a more attractive location for manufacturing. However, new factories will require very few workers—engineers have applied the wizardry of handheld devices to factory automation with amazing results.

It is hard to imagine the Federal Reserve could do more to support growth. Already, it is buying virtually all the new mortgage back securities and 70 percent of the new federal debt issued each month.

This is keeping interest rates at record lows and boosting new home construction; however, it penalizes the elderly who rely on CDs and fixed-income investments and reduces their spending on goods and services.

Many cash strapped elderly have returned to work, often taking jobs from younger workers.

Stronger growth would help and is possible. Forty-five months into the Reagan recovery, GDP was advancing at a 5.2 percent annual pace—nowadays, that pace would bring unemployment down pretty quickly.

More rapid growth requires importing less and exporting more—dealing with the $450 billion trade deficit on oil, by drilling more offshore and in Alaska, and with China, by addressing its undervalued currency and protectionism.

Faster growth also requires right sizing business regulations to make investing in new jobs less expensive and time consuming. Regulatory enforcement is needed to protect the environment, consumers and financial stability but must be delivered cost effectively and quickly to add genuine value.

Overall, more jobs for more Americans would require trimming back on tax increases and spending cuts, and encouraging more pro-growth trade, energy and regulatory policies.





headline: Arrests of Boston bombing suspect's friends: What the charges really mean
byline: By Tamara Holder


Today's news of the arrests of Dzhokar Tsarnaev's three friends is really just a sign that investigators are working from the bottom up, from the cleanup crew to hopefully the masterminds.

Two 19-year old friends of suspected Boston Marathon bomber Dzhokar Tsarnaev were charged with a single count of conspiracy to obstruct justice. A third friend was charged with making false statements to federal investigators.

For purposes of clarifying the timeline, on April 15th, two bombs were detonated near the finish line of the Boston Marathon. For days, the perpetrators remained unknown and no terrorist group claimed responsibility.

It was not until three days later, on April 18th, that the FBI released images of the alleged bombers: brothers Tamerlan and Dzhokar Tsarnaev. That night, after a wild goose chase and shootout with police, Tamerlan died of his injuries. On April 19th, Dzhokar was found hiding in a boat and he was taken into custody.

The FBI was clearly on the right path before they found Dzhokar. Also on the 19th, investigators spoke to Dzhokar’s friends, Azamat Tazhayakov and Dias Kadyrbayev. Kadyrbayev told investigators that the day before, on April 18th, he and his two friends helped Dzhokar by disposing of a computer and fireworks-filled backpack from his dorm room.

The very next day, on April 20th, authorities took Tazhayakov and Kadyrbayev, both citizens of Kazakhstan, into immigration custody on a “technical violation on a student visa for not regularly attending classes,” according to one of their attorneys. This is a common tactic among law enforcement: if a person can be taken into custody on a legitimate immigration violation, then authorities do not have to worry about the person becoming a flight risk. It also gives authorities time to interview the person about the underlying issue or crime.

The Tazhayakov/Kadyrbayev complaint highlights this tactic as it states that it was not until April 21st, again after the men were in the custody of immigration, that authorities obtained a search warrant into Dzhokar’s dorm room. (Dzhokar’s roommate is unnamed in the complaint.) At this point, authorities did not have to worry about the men disposing of additional evidence.

If convicted, Tazhayakov and Kadyrbayev face up to 5 years in prison, fines, and deportation. The third man, Robel Phillipos, an American citizen, is the only one charged with making false statements to federal investigators. This is a very broad crime. Simply saying, “I don’t know” can lead you to such a charge. He faces up to 8 years in prison and fines but obviously he cannot be deported.

Thus far, nothing suggests the conspiracies alleged between Dzhokar and his three friends include their involvement in the original plot with the Tsarnaev brothers. Instead, the men were apparently just the housekeepers for Dzhokar.

These crimes are very small in comparison to the severity of the ultimate terrorist acts. The Tsarnaev brothers obtained large amounts of explosives, guns, materials, and most importantly, knowledge about how to execute such terrible crimes. Interestingly, Tazhayakov, Kadyrbayev, Phillipos and Tsarnaev all began attending the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth at the same time in 2011. They were friends the entire time and they are all, aside from Phillipos, from a similar region of Eastern Europe. The similarities suggest that the friends know more than what investigators have shared in the complaints.

It is my suspicion that prosecutors charged the three men with minor crimes in an attempt to get more information about the Tsarnaev brothers and, more importantly, their sources of money, intelligence and education.. The friends may hopefully help investigators find those who were involved in planning the crimes, not just the cleanup crew.





headline: What men want
byline: By Suzanne Venker


Father’s Day 2013 arrives on Sunday. Here’s what we have to show for it: According to a survey conducted by Today Moms, more than half of the 7,000 mothers polled feel more stressed out by their husbands than they do by their kids.

Imagine if the “Today Show” had polled men instead and the response was the same: “More than half of all husbands feel more stressed out by their wives than they do by their kids.”

That would never happen. Not because it’s never true, but because men don’t tend to point fingers—particularly at their wives.

When pressed, however, they will tell you what they want. In a 2012 "Today Show" survey of 1,500 dads, two-thirds of the respondents said what they want most from their partner is “a little verbal acknowledgement.” In other words: respect.

In the past, taking care of a husband was something women did with pride. Today, it’s done—if it’s done at all—with resentment.

It should be noted that these polls are from the “Today Show” not Gallup. But that doesn’t make the findings insignificant. The results are, in fact, commensurate with my research on marriage and family dynamics. It is simply indisputable that women with children have become more stressed over the past decade—and that all too often they blame their husbands as the source of their discontent.

“We can’t be expected to raise children, bring home the bacon, and take care of our husbands!” women say. It’s all too much.

Indeed it is. But are men to blame? After all, they didn’t demand society change the rules so drastically. Women did.

In the past, taking care of a husband was something women did with pride. Today, it’s done—if it’s done at all—with resentment. The implication seems to be, “My husband is a grown man! He can take care of himself!” If that is how you feel, then what you’re saying is that a marriage should take care of itself.

But it can’t. A marriage is like a garden: if you don’t tend to it, it will die. Taking care of one’s spouse is part of the deal—and men don’t mind one bit. They love taking care of their wives. In exchange, however, they want to feel needed. And they don’t.

This gender dynamic is lost on modern women, who pride themselves on being strong and independent. But those qualities can undermine love. As Steve Harvey wrote in “Act Like a Lady, Think Like a Man,” “If you’ve got your own money, your own car, your own house, a Brinks alarm system, a pistol, and a guard dog, and you’re practically shouting from the rooftops that you don’t need a man to provide for you or protect you, then we will see no need to keep coming around. What in the world do you need us for if you have all of that?”

For months Americans have been dissecting the changing role of women and its effect on gender relations. The conclusion seems to be that men are threatened by women’s independence.

I disagree.

Men are happy to have women out doing their thing. What does threaten is the implication—or worse, assertion—that men bring nothing of value to the table. “Men know women are powerful, and we don’t mind that one bit. It empowers us that you’re empowered,” writes clinical psychiatrist Paul Dobransky, M.D. “Unless, that is, you disempower us in order to feel empowered.” And there it is.

It’s time to admit the truth: the so-called rise of women has come at men’s expense. Men have been disempowered.

If what I’m saying is true, you ask, then what is the solution? To turn back the clock? No—that’s impossible. (Though I do believe the one-income family, which offers a notably stress-free lifestyle, will make a comeback—the difference being that more and more dads will be the ones to stay home, which I think is a great compromise to the relentless work/family conflict.)

What I am saying is that women must be cognizant of how they use their newfound ambition. If a woman’s desire for independence is used to suggest, either verbally or non-verbally, that men are superfluous—or that a husband is just one more child to take care of—love will remain elusive. No one wants to feel like a nuisance.

So this Father’s Day, let’s give men what they want: respect. Instead of complaining about what husbands and fathers don’t do, let’s honor them for what they do do—and see if that exchange doesn’t translate to a happier, less stressful home.





headline: The unholy alliance between Obama, Democrats and Planned Parenthood
byline: By Cal Thomas


Addressing a meeting of Planned Parenthood last Friday, President Obama accused pro-lifers of wanting to "turn back the clock to policies more suited to the 1950s than the 21st century."

Like any decade, the '50s had its problems -- racism, discrimination, sexism -- but I'll defend the '50s on other grounds, if the president will defend the decade that followed.

In the '50s, for much of mainstream America drugs were something you bought at a pharmacy with a prescription; living together meant getting married first, then having babies; abortion was not legal; our culture wasn't the enemy; metal detectors were instruments one took to the beach to find loose change and schools and the streets were mostly safe.

Planned Parenthood spends a lot on electing liberal Democrats to office. It can afford to.

It's "Ozzie and Harriet" vs. Woodstock.

Dr. Kermit Gosnell is on trial now in a Philadelphia courtroom indicted on charges that he performed late-term abortions and killed babies born alive during the procedures.

Is this the 21 century the president prefers?

It is actions like this -- not the policies of the '50s -- that have weakened America and harmed the women the president claims to be defending.

How many women has the president talked to who lament their abortions and say they would have made another choice, if they had been shown alternatives?

Does the president champion the rights of these women?

According to FactCheck.org, as an Illinois state senator, Obama twice voted against the so-called "born-alive" bills that would have "defined any aborted fetus that showed signs of life as a 'born alive infant' entitled to legal protection."

He opposed the bills, he said, "as backdoor attacks on a woman's legal right to abortion." He chose politics, not lives.

In his speech to Planned Parenthood, the president never mentioned the word "abortion," preferring to talk instead about "women's health."

Could it be because 40 years after the historic Roe v. Wade decision, public opinion on abortion has changed very little? For the most part, those who favor it, favor it; those who do not, do not.

The president and Planned Parenthood's other defenders claim that if the organization were to be denied tax dollars, there would be fewer mammograms, cancer screenings and other services available, especially to poor women. Is this anything more than a distraction from Planned Parenthood's real purpose -- providing abortions?

According to analysis from the Chiaroscuro Foundation, a not-for-profit organization seeking to reduce the number of abortions in New York, Planned Parenthood "provides more abortions than any other organization in the United States, about one of every four U.S. abortions."

"Planned Parenthood's bottom line is numbers," according to a 2011 op-ed for The Hill newspaper written by former clinic director Abby Johnson, "And, with abortion as its primary money-maker, that means implementing a quota. ... I was directed to double the numbers of abortions our clinic performed in order to drive up revenue."

Planned Parenthood spends a lot on electing liberal Democrats to office. It can afford to.

According to its 2011-2012 annual report, the organization reported more than $1.2 billion in net assets and received a record $542 million in taxpayer funding. The pro-life Susan B. Anthony List has compiled the "Top 12 Reasons to Defund Planned Parenthood Now". Read it.

Planned Parenthood and the left are inextricably linked. The organization works to elect Democratic candidates who will defend their mission and those candidates, once elected, fuel Planned Parenthood's agenda by funneling tax dollars their way and trumpeting their "good works" in the name of women's health. And millions of American children are aborted.

This is what the 21st century has to offer us? This is what we should prefer over the '50s?

A 1962 hit song looked back on the stability of the '50s and the values that shaped the decade. It was called "That's Old Fashioned." The Everly Brothers sang it. One of the verses goes:

"It's a modern changing world

Everything is moving fast

But when it comes to love I like

What they did in the past."

That beats some of the lyrics from the psychedelic '60s. By comparison, the'50s look pretty good to me.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Five tried and true ways to connect with your teen
byline: By Brenda Garrison


Building a relationship with your teen may seem futile and dangerous. After all, you’re not even sure if this is still your kid.

He vaguely looks like the adorable lad in his kindergarten picture, but long gone is the precious way he used to chatter on with you.

Now if you get a grunt or two from him before he leaves for school you feel you’ve had meaningful conversation.

And the daughter who used to care for her American Girl doll like it was a miniature version of herself—well, her moods go up and down at breakneck speed.

Even though our kids act like they’d rather have acne than have us involved in their lives, it’s just that—an act. 

No matter what you do, you are the bad guy and the cause of all her problems. Yep, building a relationship with this strange teenager who calls you “Mom” or “Dad” can be frustrating.

While it would be easier to check out as a parent in these teen years (and many parents do), we will be missing priceless opportunities to influence our kids and build relationships that will last a lifetime.

Even though our kids act like they’d rather have acne than have us involved in their lives, it’s just that—an act.

My daughter Katie (now 26 and a former teen rebel) said, “It was really nice to have my parents at my band events for support and to know in case I needed anything they where there.”

Hanging in there with our kids in these teens years will not only build relationships for a lifetime, but it will help keep our kids from making even worse decisions than if we weren’t there.

Here are a few ways to build a relationship with your teen:

1. Love and accept your child where she is. Do you, or have you ever had, someone in your life that you could never please no matter how hard you tried?

If you have (and who hasn’t), you know the frustration of giving your best and yet it’s never enough.

Our teens live in a social mine field every day. They do their best with their limited maturity and reasoning abilities.

But in our eyes it can look like they’re failing miserably. I’m not saying we shouldn’t have reasonable expectations for our kids. But I am saying even when they fall short, love and accept them right where they are.

2. Stop nagging. Again, how effective is it when your spouse or boss or parents nag you? Does it make you want to do what they want you to do? Usually the exact opposite.

After Katie moved out, we were always thrilled when she came home for a visit. However, she would drop all her stuff right inside the back door.

I started to nag her but then I realized I didn’t want her to not visit because I nagged her about her stuff. So I moved it to her room without saying a word.

She later confessed when I stopped nagging she started moving it on her own because I was no longer making it a big deal.

Sure, our teens need to learn personal responsibility. When the kids all lived at home I used to give them until the end of the day to pick up their stuff. What was left lying around I collected in a bag and it cost them to buy it back. No nagging required.

3. Keep the wheels on the wagon. Encourage your child’s good decisions and successes. Help and enable your child in the positive things you see in their lives.

Once Katie became serious about finishing college, we had plenty of opportunities to encourage and advise (when asked).

She is a sculpture major, so my husband, Gene, has helped her build many supportive structures to hold her forms.

It’s a practical way he can help. What’s a positive thing your child is involved with? How can you keep the wheels on his wagon and keep it rolling down the street to his future?

4. Maximize technology appropriately. I love texting! It keeps me in contact with my girls without being invasive. My girls respond in their time. I text information that needs to be communicated, encouragement, and even funny pictures of the cat.

The key is don’t overuse it. Don’t text back, “Did you get my text?” if you don’t get a response. Also, remember that your Facebook page is just that—your Facebook page. Never post a picture of your kids or something about them without their permission.

5. Be available. Be home when your kids are home. Yes, they’re old enough to stay alone, but you never know when they’ll be ready to talk. You also never know when they’ve had a really bad day and need to talk.

Your presence gives them security, stability, and comfort. It tells our kids “You’re important to me. I’m here for you.”

Katie agrees, “In everything, my parents’ presence gave me an ongoing feeling of emotional and real security—knowing they were available to listen/talk and actually available if I needed help. ”

Building relationship with your teenager is difficult and often you won’t see results for years. Stay the course. Gene and I now enjoy being part of our adult children’s lives where we are loved and valued.





headline: Don't blame capitalism for the terrible tragedy in Bangladesh
byline: By Arthur Herman


The media has been having a field day with the recent collapse of a clothing factory complex in Bangladesh that has killed 400, with many more dead still buried in the rubble.

Since the mills inside the complex made garments for such well-known Western firms as Benetton and Wal-Mart, almost every story quotes some anti-globalization activist accusing those firms of putting profits ahead of safety.

The comments by leftie blogger Richard Mellor are typical: “the guilty are not the small fry [who own and manage the factories] but the executives in the board rooms of Wall Street.”

One of the most popular blogs on the Web describing the disaster is titled “The Terror of Capitalism.”

This is nonsense, and dangerous nonsense at that.

The sad truth is that it was anti-free market capitalist policies, both in the West and in Bangladesh, that lit the fuse for this particular disaster, as well as for a rash of fires in other Bangladeshi clothing factories that have killed hundreds.

The sad truth is that it was anti-free market capitalist policies, both in the West and in Bangladesh, that lit the fuse for this particular disaster.

It’s a classic example of what can happen when a government decides it knows best how to grow an economy–and how bad economic policy can trap millions in poverty, not to mention in the rubble of sub-standard factories.

Bangladesh is the most densely populated country in the world, with its 160 million perched atop a major flood plain. Three-quarters of the country is less than ten meters above sea level; its sad short history is pockmarked by disastrous floods, cyclones, and famines (one of the worst floods in 1998 left 31 million people homeless).

Under these conditions poverty is endemic. So when in 1974 the United States and Europe imposed quotas on how much inexpensive textiles could be imported from Japan, Hong Kong, and South Korea, a desperate Bangladeshi government decided to fill the gap in supply this created for Western clothing makers, by gearing the nation’s entire economy around a home-grown textile industry specializing in cheap garments produced at rock bottom prices.

It was classic top-down industrial policy of a kind only a Soviet bureaucrat–or an Obama green jobs czar--could love. It took almost three decades for the effort to pay off: Bangladesh’s economy is now growing at almost 6% a year, and it’s now the world’s second clothing exporter after China.

The problem is, with garments making up 80% of the country’s total exports, it’s thrown the rest of the economy out of balance–like a body builder spending all her time in the gym working on her right biceps.

The same Solyndra-style preferential policies the government uses to pump up its garment producers, work to keep other industries out, including foreign competitors who might produce that clothing more efficiently and even–it’s now obvious--under safer conditions.

For example, Bangladesh’s tariffs on foreign imports are far higher than its neighbors India and Pakistan. But if you are a garment producer you get special tax breaks on imported fabric and machinery; if you’re not, you pay high duties like everyone else.

If you’re a garment producer, you don’t have to fool with workers’ unions (the government has banned them) and wages are kept uniformly low by government fiat.

And if you’re a garment worker, the forty dollars a month you make beats a life of poverty in your native village. But there’s no incentive for working harder to earn more, or no other industries to go to that pay anything near as well–even as the factory owners’ cozy relations with government inspectors hides any safety or health problems, including from the Western firms who buy their product, until it’s too late.

So it isn’t capitalism but Western protectionism and a government that plays favorites, that turned Bangladesh into Sweatshop Nation–and turned a factory into a killing zone.





headline: What the rise of Republican governors tells us about the GOP's future
byline: By Steven Malanga


Editor's note: This article is adapted from the Spring 2013 issue of City Journal.

Shortly after Barack Obama won reelection in November, New Jersey Governor Chris Christie pointed out that Republicans’ cloudy political prospects had a bright silver lining. “One of the reasons you have 30 Republican governors in America, and why we’re the only organization to add Republican strength,” Christie said, “is because people see us getting things done.”

Christie’s stance countered most of the elite postelection commentary, which gleefully pronounced the Republican Party’s political irrelevance. But the governor was right.

Since Obama first took office in 2008, Republicans have picked up a net nine governorships, bringing their total to 30 states, which hold nearly 184 million Americans. In 24 of those states, containing 157 million Americans, Republicans also control the legislatures.

Democrats boast similar power in just 12 states, with a population of 100 million. Even Republicans’ unimpressive national showing last November didn’t reverse their state-level momentum.

It’s becoming clear that the Republican governors plan to lead in ways consistent with the reform agendas that got them elected.

The next-wave Republican governors have ignored proclamations that President Obama’s victories have vaporized fiscal conservatism and opened a new era of American big government.

At a time when Washington policymakers seem paralyzed by our toughest problems, these state-level revolutionaries have restrained government growth and radically reformed local tax codes.

They’ve made their states friendlier to business, reshaped government-employee pension systems to reduce state debt, and restrained the power of public-sector unions over state and local budgets. Some have even proposed eliminating income and corporate taxes.

Christie, whose stock has risen in New Jersey as he heads into a reelection battle this year, believes that the next national leadership of the Republican Party will emerge from the ranks of its effective governors. “I don’t think this is a core philosophical examination we have to go through,” he has observed. “What this is about is doing our jobs.”

Few observers predicted this Republican resurgence back in 2008, when elections not only handed the Democrats the White House and Congress but also cemented their control of 29 governors’ mansions.

Even as the country seemed to lurch leftward, however, state voters began to revolt against Democratic governors’ tax increases.

In 2009, Christie defeated Democratic incumbent Jon Corzine with a platform that rejected new taxes. Over the previous eight years, Corzine and his Democratic predecessor Jim McGreevey had raised taxes by more than $5 billion.

McGreevey boosted taxes and fees $3.6 billion between 2002 and 2004 alone, raising everything from income taxes to levies on home sales. Corzine followed in 2006 with his own $1.1 billion sales-tax hike.

Three years later, he slapped a temporary income-tax surcharge on households making more than $400,000 a year, part of another proposed $1 billion in new taxes. But actual tax collections imploded, leaving Christie with a $4 billion budget deficit when he took office in 2010.

Christie ran enormous political risks in trying to shrink that deficit. Despite discontent over the high taxes, polls showed that voters wanted higher levies on the rich, so that the state could continue a popular program of property-tax rebates for homeowners. And though the voters favored winning concessions from government workers, they also wanted the state to keep subsidizing public schools richly.

Christie disagreed. He chose not to renew the surcharge on high earners and slashed aid to municipalities. He also reduced the property-tax rebates; after all, property taxes are imposed by localities, so the rebates amounted to a state subsidy that let cities and towns avoid making tough budget decisions.

When homeowners complained, Christie urged them to vote against the expensive municipal and school budgets that were driving their ever-rising property taxes. Voters responded, defeating nearly 60 percent of the school budgets proposed in 2010. Christie’s reforms slashed state spending by nearly 9 percent and balanced the state budget without new taxes.

Christie then pressed the legislature to pass reforms that restrained municipal spending, including a cap on annual property-tax increases.

He also signed off on roughly $347 million in business tax cuts, though he has yet to find the revenues to make good on his pledge to lower Jersey’s income tax. Christie’s favorability rating was just 44 percent after his first budget passed, but as Jerseyans watched his strategy play out, his popularity grew.

Even before his effective and sympathetic response to Superstorm Sandy, more than 50 percent of voters approved of the job he was doing; since then, his popularity has soared.

“Despite the challenges that Sandy presents for our economy, I will not let New Jersey go back to our old ways of wasteful spending and rising taxes,” Christie recently announced. “We will deal with our problems, but we will continue to do so by protecting the hard-earned money of all New Jerseyans first and foremost.”

A year after Christie’s victory came the 2010 elections, when 26 governorships were up for grabs. Republicans wrested 11 of them from Democrats and lost only five, an impressive tally.

Perhaps the most ambitious of the 2010 crop of reform governors is Michigan’s Rick Snyder, a former venture capitalist with no previous experience in office.

Snyder initially received less national attention than Christie or Wisconsin’s Scott Walker, whose battle with government unions grabbed headlines throughout 2011.

Perhaps Snyder’s post-partisan image was what kept him off the national press’s radar for so long: he ran as a wonk who would use his business acumen to fix the state’s finances.

In his first budget, Snyder sought to close a $1.5 billion deficit while pushing—successfully, as it turned out—to get rid of the hated Michigan Business Tax.

The MBT didn’t just tax businesses’ profits, as most corporate taxes do; it taxed their revenues as well, meaning that firms had to pay even when they weren’t making money.

Politicians and policy experts in Michigan had long acknowledged that the MBT was one of the nation’s worst corporate taxes and that it drove away business. But it brought the state $1.7 billion in yearly revenue that no previous governor had wanted to forgo.

Snyder’s tax-reform plan was audacious. To make up for the lost MBT revenues, he proposed a flat corporate levy; jettisoning $400 million in targeted corporate tax credits, which had tried to keep particular companies in the state; and (most controversially) taxing the pensions of all Michigan residents.

Michigan, Snyder observed, was one of only three states that exempted pensions from income tax. The anomaly had originated in the mid-sixties, when state pols and public-sector unions reached a deal to exclude government pensions from taxes and public anger over the favoritism led to a broadened exemption.

Snyder’s call to tax pensions understandably upset retirees and government-worker groups, who threatened to try to recall the governor. But he persisted, and the recall idea fizzled.

The Michigan legislature eventually agreed with him and reshaped the state’s tax code. The new arrangement moved Michigan’s corporate levy from next-to-worst in the Tax Foundation’s national rankings to 18th best. “The Wicked Witch is done,” Snyder said.

Nor was that the end of Snyder’s reform drive. Last year, he lowered Michigan’s personal income-tax rate. And now he’s seeking to eliminate the state’s so-called personal property tax, which is actually an outdated tax on business equipment. Snyder’s changes are “unshackling the state from its obsolete economic past and positioning it for new prosperity,” noted the Detroit News.

In Kansas, meanwhile, Governor Sam Brownback is pushing to extend a tax-reform program. Brownback roared into office in 2011 proposing to lower income-tax rates and to regain the lost revenue by capping some popular tax expenditures, like the mortgage-interest deduction.

Republicans in the state legislature, balking at ending the popular items, passed a tax-cut package without them, lowering the state’s income-tax rate from 6.45 percent to 4.9 percent.

“The governor said early on… ‘Go bold.’ And we did,” said Mike O’Neal, Speaker of the Kansas House of Representatives. Brownback paid for the tax cut in part by keeping state spending flat and by using increased revenues from a modest upturn in the state economy. He’s now hoping to end enough tax-code deductions and loopholes to save Kansas more than $1 billion in revenue.

States are laboratories of democracy, in Justice Louis Brandeis’s famous formulation, and the very different experiments that their Republican and Democratic governors conduct over the next few years—especially on issues that go to the heart of economic competitiveness—will be eye-opening.

In the months since President Obama’s reelection, it’s becoming clear that the Republican governors plan to lead in ways consistent with the reform agendas that got them elected. How they fare may steer the Republican Party’s course more decisively than any soul-searching in Washington does.





headline: On National Day of Prayer, America needs prayer like never before
byline: By Pastor Greg Laurie


When Shirley Dobson, the wife of James Dobson, asked me to be the Honorary Chairman of the National Day of Prayer Task Force, I wondered at first if she was talking to the right person. I was so humbled, and of course I agreed.

Why? Because America needs prayer like never before.

In fact, I think the answers to our deepest needs as a nation are spiritual, not political.

We need divine intervention, and if we don’t receive it, we are in for some very dark days indeed. The United States needs another spiritual awakening or, as it is often called, a revival.

Despite the fact that we, as a nation, have largely forgotten God, the good news is: God has not forgotten us.

What is a revival? Revival means to restore something to its original condition.

Perhaps we cannot say that America is a completely Christian country, as it would seem everyone in it would need to believe in Jesus Christ to make that qualification. However, there is no denying that this country has a Judeo-Christian foundation.

But we have gotten too far from that. In the words of President Abraham Lincoln, “We have forgotten God.” We see trouble in our culture today. We see the breakdown of the family, crippling addictions, and random acts of horrific violence.

We have done our best to remove God’s Word and His counsel from our courtrooms, classrooms, and culture. Despite the fact that we, as a nation, have largely forgotten God, the good news is: God has not forgotten us. He still can bless and redeem our country.

One of the reasons I know that is because He redeemed me.

I never knew my father. My mother was an alcoholic who married and divorced seven times. I smoked pot, dropped acid, and drank my problems away. But God got hold of me and my life was turned around.

And if there’s redemption for me and my situation, there is redemption for everyone and everything.

I think a lot of the problems in America started back in the 1960s, when I was a kid. That experimentation of the ‘60s has turned into an epidemic in the 21st century.

Sociologist Robert Nesbet wrote, “The ideologies which gained entry into the academy in the ‘60s claim that fundamental intellectual principles of Western culture were illegitimate and must be overthrown. And with that we destroyed terms like truth, good, and evil.”

People laugh at the Christian worldview today. Up is down. Right is wrong. Wrong is right. So in our schools, evolution is taught as fact even though it is disputed in the scientific community. And yet they will not even consider teaching the biblical truth of creationism.

We basically teach our children that they crawled out of the ooze. They are highly evolved animals. Thus there is no God, there is no afterlife, and there is no final judgment. And then we scratch our heads and wonder what is happening when a kid gets a gun and walks onto a campus and starts shooting people.

And the pundits and the experts opine away and everyone asks why. And my question is, “Well, why not?” If there is no right and wrong, if there is no good and evil, if there is no God, why would we expect people to live morally?

To quote Lincoln again, “We have forgotten the gracious hand which preserved us in peace and multiplied and enriched and strengthened us and we have vainly imagined in the deceitfulness of our heart that all of these blessings that we see in our country were produced by some superior wisdom and virtue of our own.”

That’s why the only hope is not merely a return to conservative values; it is a return to the biblical truth that we find only in the pages of Scripture.

If we want to see our nation turn back to righteousness, then we must pray. Please join me in doing that on May 2, the National Day of Prayer.





headline: Arming untrained teachers puts our kids at greater risk
byline: By Shane F. Krauser


In April, the U.S. Senate struck down gun control legislation that would have required universal background checks for gun purchases and imposed limits on gun magazine capacity, among other measures.

Standing with family members of victims of the Newtown, Conn., tragedy, President Obama declared that this is only “round one” of the ongoing gun control debate, which has been at the center of the national discourse since the Dec. 14 attacks.

While the debate rages on, most are agreed on one thing: the loss of 20 children and six teachers on that day awoke the nation to the need for heightened security, especially in our nation’s schools.

In the wake of this tragedy, there is growing support among Second Amendment advocates for arming teachers with guns.

Nothing could be more important than making sure the people who defend our children are adequately trained to do so.

The sentiment is understandable.

Columbine, Virginia Tech and now Newtown are all stark reminders of the havoc that can be wreaked by evil people with guns.

However, the overly simplistic proposal to arm all teachers is a knee-jerk reaction of monumental proportions that could ultimately hurt their cause. To say that it is not well thought out would be a gross understatement.

America’s Constitution secures the right to bear arms. The right to self-defense is as American as apple pie, and gun control legislation like that proposed by the Obama administration runs directly against our character.

Still, placing a third party in a position of defending our young people deserves vigorous debate and contemplation.

Nothing could be more important than making sure the people who defend our children are adequately trained to do so.

Many assume that learning the skill of armed defense is simply a matter of taking a position on the firing line at the local range and shooting tight groups at a non-moving target.

While range exercise is important to becoming proficient with a firearm, it does not adequately prepare one for real confrontation.

Make no mistake about it: A teacher who is placed in a position of defending others will step into a foreign world of armed confrontation where unforgiving bullets fly.

As Lt. Col. David Grossman, a world-renowned expert in the field of human aggression, has noted, interpersonal human aggression is the “universal human phobia.”

While we talk tough at the water cooler, a firefight is certainly not Monopoly or Bingo. This is where so many overlook a compelling and frightening reality.

Armed conflict causes an adrenaline effect, which influences a person’s ability to mount a real and effective defense. When a person assumes a defensive posture, the natural physiological and mental reactions change the playing field in significant ways. These reactions include tunnel vision, auditory exclusion, heavy breathing, increased heart rate, profuse sweating, time dilation and the unexpected release of urine and defecation from the body.

Most people have not been trained to deal with these natural reactions. As a result, individuals who may be justified in using lethal force become incredibly dangerous to themselves and others.

Only intense and consistent training can address this issue.

Let’s be clear: There is nothing inherently wrong with putting guns in the hands of teachers. However, it would be wrong to saddle untrained teachers with the responsibility of protecting our children simply by placing a lethal weapon on their hip.

They need adequate training.

The eight or even 40 hours of training that's typically the standard for entry-level personal defense courses is simply not enough to expect a teacher to be prepared for what an armed situation would require.

Military personnel and police officers immerse themselves in training with firearms defense, and even they get it wrong at times.

So, how should we go about protecting our children and keeping our schools safe? We must place adequately trained armed guards, such as police officers and military men and women, in schools. Such protection would create a deterrent effect for any would-be killer.

The NRA’s report, which outlines security needs and suggested training requirements for keeping our schools safe, is an important step in determining what we can do as a nation to protect our precious children.

Experience demonstrates the way to stop violence is with countervailing force. However, an effective trained response takes serious time, money and resources to create. This responsibility must not be taken lightly.

Law enforcement agencies and the U.S. military allocate significant resources to train their people to defend their country, their communities, their teammates and themselves. In the heated debate over defense and gun laws in recent months, we have overlooked this important fact.

Unfortunately, sweeping gun control laws like those put forward in the Senate do not address the fundamental issues that compromise our safety.

The problem is not guns or magazine capacities, but the evil people who manage to get their hands on guns, regardless of laws.

Sadly, we often consider solutions without thinking beyond next week; in the process, we create a more dangerous society.

We have at our disposal common-sense solutions to the problem of gun violence in our schools. The blanket proposal to arm all teachers without intense training is not one of them.

Let’s move to address the problem with real, viable solutions. After all, this is America, and few things are more important than allocating money to protecting our children and our future.





headline: Plan B for all girls -- science finally trumps politics and emotion
byline: By Cathleen London


Monday, the FDA issued a statement declaring it would approve Plan B One Step (a form of emergency contraception) for over the counter sale without restriction. 

It is about time.

This decision allows science to trump politics and emotion.

Plan B One step is a single dose of levonorgestrel, a hormone used in oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), that when taken within 3 days of unprotected sexual activity is effective in reducing the chance of pregnancy.

To deny young adolescents access to medically necessary and proven care is essentially reproductive slavery.

It works in a similar matter to oral contraceptives that are taken daily (though less effective than regular use of OCPs). 

It is NOT an abortifacient.

Emergency contraception (EC) has been available in the United States since 1999. At that time it was only available with a prescription. 

In 2009 it became available for those over 17 without a prescription, and retained its prescription status for those younger than 17. 

There are decades of data on the safety of emergency contraception. There is no situation in which the risk of EC (whether combined hormones or a single hormone such as Plan B) outweighs the benefits. 

Numerous studies have attested to the safety of levonorgestrel: there are NO reported deaths nor serious complications.

The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) carefully considered whether younger females were able to understand how to use Plan B one step. 

CDER determined, after looking at all the scientific evidence, that adolescent females understood that EC is NOT for routine use, and that the product does not protect them against sexually transmitted diseases. 

The scientific data also show that young adolescent females could use the product properly without the intervention of a healthcare provider. 

In 2011, after reviewing the process used by CDER, the FDA was ready to make Plan B One-Step over the counter (OTC) without restrictions. 

In an unprecedented move, the Secretary of Health and Human Services intervened and prevented Plan B One Step from attaining OTC status. This was not a decision based on the scientific evidence.

Emergency contraception (EC) is sold over the counter in 6 countries and is available directly from a pharmacist without a prescription in 54 countries. 

Studies have shown that repeated use of EC is safer than pregnancy, particularly when pregnancy is unintended. 

In the United States nearly 50% of pregnancies are unintended. Studies have shown that easier access to contraceptives reduces unintended pregnancy rates (and abortions). 

Not only are the concerns about whether young adolescent females can comprehend how to use EC demonstrably false, this is a group that needs access to health care that is proven to be safe and effective. 

If a young girl is sexually active, whether by choice or not, she should not be denied reproductive rights. She should be allowed to make timely reproductive decisions about her own body within the dictates of her religious and moral codes.

To deny young adolescents access to medically necessary and proven care is essentially reproductive slavery.

The FDA joins physicians and scientists including: the American Medical Association, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Association of Reproductive Health Professionals in its support of making Plan B over the counter without restrictions. 

Finally, science trumps politics.





headline: Distracted driving killed my wife, don't let it kill yours
byline: By Martin Spinelli


One beautifully clear September morning a few years ago my wife and four-year-old son were parked in their Nissan on the side of highway heading into Canterbury, England, where she worked and where our boy was in day care.

No one knows why she stopped, but her car was several feet on the correct side of the line, she was well within her legal rights to be there and, I’m sure she assumed, “safe.”

At 10:21 that morning a tractor-trailer, an 18-wheeler, a really big truck was traveling at fifty-five miles per hour on that same stretch of road. The trucker, a fifty-four-year-old father of two, had not taken his required driving breaks for three days prior.

My son beat the odds: He survived when I was told to prepare for him dying. 

At 10:22 that truck hit that Nissan with enough force to send it flying, spinning into the air until it came to rest 230 feet away—that’s about one-and-half lengths of an Olympic swimming pool.

The truck was outfitted with all the latest safety features. Its breaks, applied only after the crash, were working as well that day as on the day they’d been installed.

The police report of the crash says that my wife was killed instantly—I’m thankful that she didn’t suffer. Our son, it says, was thrown fifty feet from the car but survived—for this I’m grateful beyond my ability to express.

The police report describes every angle and position, every detail of visibility and the location of every piece of my wife’s car in painstaking scientific detail.But these are just words and numbers, the photos of the crash tell another story.

The one that will stay with me forever is the photo of my son’s little wooden push-bike pulverized to splinters. My son loved that bike. But his new one was better—a big boy’s bike.

The trucker never told the police exactly what happened.Some of the investigators thought he might have been messing with the radio or some papers on his dashboard.Most of the others guessed that he had fallen asleep at the wheel.

He would have felt it when he hit them though, that would have certainly gotten his attention. In the end, he was sentenced to two-and-half years in prison for causing death by dangerous driving.

My son beat the odds: he survived when I was told to prepare for him dying. He pulled himself out of a coma when I was told he’d likely never wake up.

He walked on his own when this seemed unlikely. And, only three months after the crash that killed his mother and should have killed him, he went to a normal, mainstream elementary school when I had been told this would never happen.

The crash also transformed me. At my son’s bedside, pulling him through his recovery, I found real meaning and a sense of genuine purpose for the first time in my life. The fast-track career that had been so important to me before seemed irrelevant compared to my new vocation: being the best father I could possibly be. This was what I was meant to be doing.

My son is now 11-years-old.He plays soccer, has lots of friends, is great at math and amazingly good on the piano.Simply watching him grow up makes me happy every day.

While our story is ultimately a very positive one of recovery and redemption, the incalculable pain, grief and damage that precipitated it could have been so easily avoided if one person had not let their attention slip behind the wheel.

April is Distracted Driving Awareness Month and I’m sharing my story in an effort to reduce the number of needless deaths on the road.

Our tragedy happened in England, but the statistics are virtually the same across the developed world: roughly three deaths in every thousand are the fault of distracted drivers. If you’re driving, drive alert.





headline: The truth about the Kermit Gosnell trial
byline: By Chuck Donovan


Closing arguments are expected next week in the trial of Dr. Kermit Gosnell, the late-term Philadelphia abortionist. As the trial nears conclusion media coverage of the gruesome testimony in the case has intensified.

A coordinated effort by pro-life bloggers and citizens on Twitter managed to break through a mass media cone of silence, and now commentators across the political and pro-life/pro-choice spectrum are offering their perspectives.

Some of those perspectives are startling.So, too, are some of the omissions about the entire chain of events – 40 years long and counting – that Gosnell represents.

Among the startling responses is the claim that anti-abortion policies produced Gosnell’s depredations.

The stories emerging from the Gosnell trial are dark, bloody and remorseful, a repudiation of what health and happiness should be.

In a piece for Slate magazine’s “MoneyBox” blog, Matthew Yglesias declares his sympathy with the view that Gosnell is the logical residue of a legal and business culture in which there are few late-term abortion providers: “Making it difficult to establish an above-board competitive marketplace with multiple legal providers of late-term abortion facilities ensures that the demand for the procedure will be pushed into low-quality channels.” (A rare example, by the way, of a liberal commentator embracing a robust health care marketplace and linking quality to it.)

Apart from its cold calculus, this perspective on Gosnell overlooks the more basic reason why there isn’t a thriving marketplace of doctors willing to kill babies nearly or fully capable of living outside the womb: The practice itself is in no way one of the arts of medicine.

Few are drawn to it because few people with rarefied medical skills see the fulfillment of their years of training in wrenching apart a baby limb from limb.

For mothers and babies alike, the stories emerging from the Gosnell trial are dark, bloody and remorseful, a repudiation of what health and happiness should be.

Put more simply, what Gosnell was doing was objectively wrong and obviously hurtful.

Moreover, lawlessness – and not a set of pro-life laws – is what gave birth to Gosnell’s crimes, and that spirit of lawlessness, of no limits and no scruples, dates back to the period before Roe. v. Wade.

Tim Carney of the Washington Examiner has laid out in detail how Gosnell vaulted into public view in 1972 through his involvement in another gruesome episode, the “Mother’s Day Massacre.”

In full view of public television cameras, Gosnell brought 15 poor Chicago women to Philadelphia to undergo second-trimester abortions induced by inserting a mass of razor-sharp plastic coils into their wombs.

The so-called “super coil” method was the invention of Harvey Karman, an ex-con with a diploma-mill Ph.D., who was a darling of International Planned Parenthood.

That Gosnell was able to participate in a highly publicized event that left nine of its 15 “subjects” with major medical complications and suffer no penalty was a harbinger of the path he would take over four decades.

Legal abortion resembles the back alley because the two overlapped to an overwhelming degree.

In the early days of legal abortion, Mary Calderone, at the time national medical director of Planned Parenthood, reported an estimate that 90 percent of illegal abortionists pre-Roe were, in fact, physicians. Then-Planned Parenthood president Alan Guttmacher’s estimate was 80 percent.

The miracles of modern perinatology, the ability to save the lives of babies born as early as 24 weeks’ gestation, the marvels of fetal surgery that have inspired specialties at children’s hospitals across the country, including Philadelphia’s pioneering unit – these are the spires and sinews of medical progress.

The Gosnell trial is a stark reminder of another fact. The women who entered the infernal portal of 3801 Lancaster Ave suffered from an array of debilities, chief among them the absence of hope.

In a sex-saturated society availed of an arsenal of pregnancy-preventing and –destroying drugs, devices and, yes, abortion clinics, they turned to a facility that should have shocked and repelled them from the moment they saw its battered and blood-stained environs.

Some would argue that their neighborhoods lack enough family planning centers; more importantly, they lack enough families.There is a relationship poverty that runs deeper than any other kind. Low expectations can be a hard form of bigotry.

Despite this, in the neighborhood of Kermit Gosnell there were advanced hospitals, Catholic pregnancy and adoption services, and two pregnancy care centers: clean, well-lit places where they and their children would have been valued and cared for.

Do we need more such centers, more highlighting of their work, more funding?Yes, and we need more obstetricians as well, and reform of a tort law system that is driving out quality physicians by the hundreds and leaving in place some whose victims are too impoverished and too ashamed to sue them.

Incredibly, part of the agenda of NARAL is to drive pregnancy care centers out of business or block their advertising. They label them “fake clinics.”

Meanwhile, the Obama administration continues to pursue its over-the-top “preventive services mandate,” fully aware that one of its primary effects may be to close religious hospitals that care for millions of America’s poor and hundreds of thousands of expectant mothers.

Building multiple late-term abortion clinics in search of a bazaar of absolute choice is the last thing our nation’s poor neighborhoods need.

We would do well instead to seek a new birth of compassion, reinvestment of time and energy in the Hippocratic ideal of “doing no harm,” and the affirmation of the equal value of every human life.





headline: Don't blame capitalism for the terrible tragedy in Bangladesh
byline: By Arthur Herman


The media has been having a field day with the recent collapse of a clothing factory complex in Bangladesh that has killed 400, with many more dead still buried in the rubble.

Since the mills inside the complex made garments for such well-known Western firms as Benetton and Wal-Mart, almost every story quotes some anti-globalization activist accusing those firms of putting profits ahead of safety.

The comments by leftie blogger Richard Mellor are typical: “the guilty are not the small fry [who own and manage the factories] but the executives in the board rooms of Wall Street.”

One of the most popular blogs on the Web describing the disaster is titled “The Terror of Capitalism.”

This is nonsense, and dangerous nonsense at that.

The sad truth is that it was anti-free market capitalist policies, both in the West and in Bangladesh, that lit the fuse for this particular disaster, as well as for a rash of fires in other Bangladeshi clothing factories that have killed hundreds.

The sad truth is that it was anti-free market capitalist policies, both in the West and in Bangladesh, that lit the fuse for this particular disaster.

It’s a classic example of what can happen when a government decides it knows best how to grow an economy–and how bad economic policy can trap millions in poverty, not to mention in the rubble of sub-standard factories.

Bangladesh is the most densely populated country in the world, with its 160 million perched atop a major flood plain. Three-quarters of the country is less than ten meters above sea level; its sad short history is pockmarked by disastrous floods, cyclones, and famines (one of the worst floods in 1998 left 31 million people homeless).

Under these conditions poverty is endemic. So when in 1974 the United States and Europe imposed quotas on how much inexpensive textiles could be imported from Japan, Hong Kong, and South Korea, a desperate Bangladeshi government decided to fill the gap in supply this created for Western clothing makers, by gearing the nation’s entire economy around a home-grown textile industry specializing in cheap garments produced at rock bottom prices.

It was classic top-down industrial policy of a kind only a Soviet bureaucrat–or an Obama green jobs czar--could love. It took almost three decades for the effort to pay off: Bangladesh’s economy is now growing at almost 6% a year, and it’s now the world’s second clothing exporter after China.

The problem is, with garments making up 80% of the country’s total exports, it’s thrown the rest of the economy out of balance–like a body builder spending all her time in the gym working on her right biceps.

The same Solyndra-style preferential policies the government uses to pump up its garment producers, work to keep other industries out, including foreign competitors who might produce that clothing more efficiently and even–it’s now obvious--under safer conditions.

For example, Bangladesh’s tariffs on foreign imports are far higher than its neighbors India and Pakistan. But if you are a garment producer you get special tax breaks on imported fabric and machinery; if you’re not, you pay high duties like everyone else.

If you’re a garment producer, you don’t have to fool with workers’ unions (the government has banned them) and wages are kept uniformly low by government fiat.

And if you’re a garment worker, the forty dollars a month you make beats a life of poverty in your native village. But there’s no incentive for working harder to earn more, or no other industries to go to that pay anything near as well–even as the factory owners’ cozy relations with government inspectors hides any safety or health problems, including from the Western firms who buy their product, until it’s too late.

So it isn’t capitalism but Western protectionism and a government that plays favorites, that turned Bangladesh into Sweatshop Nation–and turned a factory into a killing zone.





headline: The trouble with presidential libraries
byline: By Juan Williams


Congratulations to President George W. Bush!

His new presidential library is a tribute to his leadership. But that does lead to a question.

As the fight gets underway to claim the Obama Presidential Library – the University of Hawaii versus the University of Chicago – is the original intent of presidential libraries as archives of an administration’s papers is being lost?

The new reality is that the libraries are a tourist hot spot for a president’s political fans. The original goal was to allow the federal government to keep control of presidential records and as a matter of public trust holding former presidents accountable for their actions.

The libraries are built entirely with private money. And an endowment of private money is also required to help with operational costs. But the bill for managing all of the libraries goes to taxpayers. It is part of the budget of the National Archives and Records Administration. And the libraries’ budgets are the responsibility of the NARA.

As a frequent visitor to presidential libraries to do research for books I can tell you that these sites rarely highlight stories about questionable actions by any president.

In December of 2010 the Congressional Research Service reported that the public-private partnership behind presidential libraries opens the government’s checkbook to being used to glorify ex-presidents. The CRS said it is “unclear” which part of a presidential library and its exhibits are the work of private funders and which part has the imprimatur of the federal government.

As a frequent visitor to presidential libraries to do research for books I can tell you that these sites rarely highlight stories about questionable actions by any president.

And several critics have noted that when the former president or any of his family remains alive they are given tremendous power over controlling the content of the library even as taxpayers pay the bills.

Former presidents can bar documents and even information about controversial incidents from public access for up to 12 years after their presidency. And too many documents remain classified by government agencies, often under pressure from former presidents and their friends.

The result is that presidential libraries are now often “a huge, glitzy, glamorous museum of spin – a giant campaign commercial in museum form,” as Benjamin Hufbauer, the author of ‘Presidential Temples: How Memorial and Libraries Shape Public Memory,’ told the Los Angeles Times this week.

The Bush Library’s curators are sensitive to the growing problem with presidential libraries. They have made a point of letting the public make up their own minds as they offer a fairly straight presentation of the facts of controversial episodes from the decision to go to war in Iraq to the government’s role in Hurricane Katrina.

And then there is the smell of corruption.

President Clinton’s library in Arkansas was built with donations from several foreign governments and corporations, including the government of Saudi Arabia. Some of those donations arrived while he was still in office.

On his last day in the White House President Clinton issued a pardon for a billionaire commodities trader, Marc Rich. Rich’s former wife, Denise, donated $450,000 to the Clinton library. That aroused suspicion that it is possible to buy a presidential pardon.

Rep. John Duncan Jr. (R-Tenn.) was prompted by the Rich pardon to propose legislation requiring any donation of more than $200 to a presidential library be publicly reported. And Duncan’s bill has punch.

It makes it a crime for “contributors or fundraising organizations to knowingly and willfully submit false information or omit material information.” Duncan was also concerned about donations from foreign leaders and the potential effect those donations could have on a president’s decisions at a time when the president is least accountable – the end of his or her term.

Rep. Duncan denies that he introduced the bill to embarrass President Clinton. The complete list of donors to the Clinton Library was made public voluntarily but only during Hillary Clinton’s confirmation hearings to become secretary of state.

The Duncan bill, a similar version of which was first introduced in 1999, as the Clinton library was being built, has been up for a vote in ’02, ’07, and ’09.

But it has not passed.

The Senate almost approved in 2008 but former Sen. Ted Stevens (R-Alaska) blocked it because he felt it targeted George W. Bush’s presidential library in Texas.

“I introduced and have supported this legislation under both Democratic and Republican Presidents,” Duncan wrote in a press release last month before the opening of the new Bush library.

The Bush library foundation has promised to release the names of all its donors – unless they requested anonymity.

But the time has come for Congress, the archives and the presidents to take a look at the growth and use of presidential libraries that began with Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s library in Hyde Park, N.Y.





headline: For the good of the country, let's abolish the IRS
byline: By Cal Thomas


Given the revelation two weeks ago that the IRS targeted conservative groups seeking tax-exempt status, it's worth recalling President Obama's Ohio State University commencement address earlier this month.. The president decried "voices" warning "that tyranny is always lurking just around the corner."

It's no longer lurking. It's here.

Testimony before the House Ways and Means Committee by the outgoing acting IRS commissioner, Steve Miller, as well as numerous statements by individuals claiming they have been harassed and intimidated by IRS agents, reveal a government agency out of control, or more precisely, under the control of political hacks.



It's doubtful this was a freelance operation. J. Russell George, the Treasury inspector general for tax administration, testified he knew as early as June 2012 that the IRS was targeting conservatives, but did nothing to stop it during the presidential campaign. Who else knew?

The delay in tax exemption approval prevented some conservative groups from donating money to the Romney campaign or to groups supporting his candidacy. The IRS even asked one Tea Party group in Richmond to identify all of their financial donors and volunteers.

There is a simple way to restrain the IRS so this type of intrusion doesn't happen again: get rid of it. That's what Steve Forbes proposed in his run for president in 1996 and 2000. So did former presidential candidate Rep. Ron Paul (R-Texas). Forbes proposed a flat tax of 17 percent and a simple tax code. Individuals could file their tax returns on a post card.

"In the late 1800s, when Congress first attempted to impose an income tax, the notion of taxing a citizen's hard work was considered radical," Paul wrote in 2001. "Public outcry ensued; more importantly, the Supreme Court ruled the income tax unconstitutional. Only with passage of the 16th Amendment did Congress gain the ability to tax the productive endeavors of its citizens." And tax it did. And waste it did.

Paul contends the income tax amounts to only about one-third of federal revenue. I'm willing to wager that if nonessential government agencies and programs were eliminated and those remaining were reformed, or privatized, the savings would more than make up for the revenue loss.

Congressional Democrats -- and some Republicans -- will be reluctant to propose such a "radical" solution, because too many focus on revenue and not enough on misspending and dysfunctional agencies and programs.

The testimony that came out of the recent House Ways and Means Committee hearing is just a part of what constitutional attorney John W. Whitehead writes about in his new book, "A Government of Wolves: The Emerging American Police State." It sounds alarmist, but reading it should sound an alarm for every American.

The summary on the book jacket says Whitehead "paints a chilling portrait of a nation in the final stages of transformation into a police state." Examples include the growing number of "surveillance cameras, drug-sniffing dogs, SWAT raids, roadside strip searches, blood draws at DUI checkpoints, drones, GPS tracking devices, zero tolerance policies, over-criminalization, and free speech zones."

In his introduction to the book, writer and First Amendment authority Nat Hentoff says: "...I believe we are in a worse state now than ever before in this country. With the surveillance state closing in on us, we are fighting to keep our country free from our own government."

Like most tyrannies, this one is being ushered in with a smile. The public is told it is for our "security" and that it's good for us. With taxation, we are told the government "needs" our money and if we complain they are taking too much and wasting it, we're thought to be "greedy" and "unfair."

Thomas Jefferson foresaw what can happen when power corrupts: "Experience hath shewn, that even under the best forms of government those entrusted with power have, in time, and by slow operations, perverted it into tyranny."

Jefferson would see the IRS scandal and Whitehead's warnings as prime examples. Repeal the 16th Amendment, eliminate the IRS, put the government back within its constitutional boundaries and tyranny will be defeated.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: The unholy alliance between Obama, Democrats and Planned Parenthood
byline: By Cal Thomas


Addressing a meeting of Planned Parenthood last Friday, President Obama accused pro-lifers of wanting to "turn back the clock to policies more suited to the 1950s than the 21st century."

Like any decade, the '50s had its problems -- racism, discrimination, sexism -- but I'll defend the '50s on other grounds, if the president will defend the decade that followed.

In the '50s, for much of mainstream America drugs were something you bought at a pharmacy with a prescription; living together meant getting married first, then having babies; abortion was not legal; our culture wasn't the enemy; metal detectors were instruments one took to the beach to find loose change and schools and the streets were mostly safe.

Planned Parenthood spends a lot on electing liberal Democrats to office. It can afford to.

It's "Ozzie and Harriet" vs. Woodstock.

Dr. Kermit Gosnell is on trial now in a Philadelphia courtroom indicted on charges that he performed late-term abortions and killed babies born alive during the procedures.

Is this the 21 century the president prefers?

It is actions like this -- not the policies of the '50s -- that have weakened America and harmed the women the president claims to be defending.

How many women has the president talked to who lament their abortions and say they would have made another choice, if they had been shown alternatives?

Does the president champion the rights of these women?

According to FactCheck.org, as an Illinois state senator, Obama twice voted against the so-called "born-alive" bills that would have "defined any aborted fetus that showed signs of life as a 'born alive infant' entitled to legal protection."

He opposed the bills, he said, "as backdoor attacks on a woman's legal right to abortion." He chose politics, not lives.

In his speech to Planned Parenthood, the president never mentioned the word "abortion," preferring to talk instead about "women's health."

Could it be because 40 years after the historic Roe v. Wade decision, public opinion on abortion has changed very little? For the most part, those who favor it, favor it; those who do not, do not.

The president and Planned Parenthood's other defenders claim that if the organization were to be denied tax dollars, there would be fewer mammograms, cancer screenings and other services available, especially to poor women. Is this anything more than a distraction from Planned Parenthood's real purpose -- providing abortions?

According to analysis from the Chiaroscuro Foundation, a not-for-profit organization seeking to reduce the number of abortions in New York, Planned Parenthood "provides more abortions than any other organization in the United States, about one of every four U.S. abortions."

"Planned Parenthood's bottom line is numbers," according to a 2011 op-ed for The Hill newspaper written by former clinic director Abby Johnson, "And, with abortion as its primary money-maker, that means implementing a quota. ... I was directed to double the numbers of abortions our clinic performed in order to drive up revenue."

Planned Parenthood spends a lot on electing liberal Democrats to office. It can afford to.

According to its 2011-2012 annual report, the organization reported more than $1.2 billion in net assets and received a record $542 million in taxpayer funding. The pro-life Susan B. Anthony List has compiled the "Top 12 Reasons to Defund Planned Parenthood Now". Read it.

Planned Parenthood and the left are inextricably linked. The organization works to elect Democratic candidates who will defend their mission and those candidates, once elected, fuel Planned Parenthood's agenda by funneling tax dollars their way and trumpeting their "good works" in the name of women's health. And millions of American children are aborted.

This is what the 21st century has to offer us? This is what we should prefer over the '50s?

A 1962 hit song looked back on the stability of the '50s and the values that shaped the decade. It was called "That's Old Fashioned." The Everly Brothers sang it. One of the verses goes:

"It's a modern changing world

Everything is moving fast

But when it comes to love I like

What they did in the past."

That beats some of the lyrics from the psychedelic '60s. By comparison, the'50s look pretty good to me.



Cal Thomas is America's most widely syndicated newspaper columnist and a Fox News contributor. Follow him onTwitter@CalThomas. Readers may e-mail Cal Thomas at tmseditors@tribune.com.



headline: Benghazi is the blank spot in the Obama presidency
byline: By Rich Lowry


On “Fox News Sunday” recently, White House aide Dan Pfeiffer was asked about President Barack Obama’s whereabouts the night of the Sept. 11 attack in Benghazi.

This was the night when we lost our first ambassador in 30 years, and when three other Americans were killed in an attack lasting for hours at multiple locations. Since the president is commander in chief, one would think that where he was and what he did during such an event would be of obvious public concern.

Not according to Pfeiffer. He deemed the president’s location, and specifically whether he was in the Situation Room, “a largely irrelevant fact.” If it is so unimportant, why not simply tell us? It’s not as if we haven’t heard largely irrelevant information before.

Obama’s actions and nonactions on that terrible night are a blank spot in his presidency. We simply don’t know much about them, and the White House has always been perfectly content to leave it that way.

To continue reading Rich Lowry's New York Post column on this topic, click here.





headline: Arming untrained teachers puts our kids at greater risk
byline: By Shane F. Krauser


In April, the U.S. Senate struck down gun control legislation that would have required universal background checks for gun purchases and imposed limits on gun magazine capacity, among other measures.

Standing with family members of victims of the Newtown, Conn., tragedy, President Obama declared that this is only “round one” of the ongoing gun control debate, which has been at the center of the national discourse since the Dec. 14 attacks.

While the debate rages on, most are agreed on one thing: the loss of 20 children and six teachers on that day awoke the nation to the need for heightened security, especially in our nation’s schools.

In the wake of this tragedy, there is growing support among Second Amendment advocates for arming teachers with guns.

Nothing could be more important than making sure the people who defend our children are adequately trained to do so.

The sentiment is understandable.

Columbine, Virginia Tech and now Newtown are all stark reminders of the havoc that can be wreaked by evil people with guns.

However, the overly simplistic proposal to arm all teachers is a knee-jerk reaction of monumental proportions that could ultimately hurt their cause. To say that it is not well thought out would be a gross understatement.

America’s Constitution secures the right to bear arms. The right to self-defense is as American as apple pie, and gun control legislation like that proposed by the Obama administration runs directly against our character.

Still, placing a third party in a position of defending our young people deserves vigorous debate and contemplation.

Nothing could be more important than making sure the people who defend our children are adequately trained to do so.

Many assume that learning the skill of armed defense is simply a matter of taking a position on the firing line at the local range and shooting tight groups at a non-moving target.

While range exercise is important to becoming proficient with a firearm, it does not adequately prepare one for real confrontation.

Make no mistake about it: A teacher who is placed in a position of defending others will step into a foreign world of armed confrontation where unforgiving bullets fly.

As Lt. Col. David Grossman, a world-renowned expert in the field of human aggression, has noted, interpersonal human aggression is the “universal human phobia.”

While we talk tough at the water cooler, a firefight is certainly not Monopoly or Bingo. This is where so many overlook a compelling and frightening reality.

Armed conflict causes an adrenaline effect, which influences a person’s ability to mount a real and effective defense. When a person assumes a defensive posture, the natural physiological and mental reactions change the playing field in significant ways. These reactions include tunnel vision, auditory exclusion, heavy breathing, increased heart rate, profuse sweating, time dilation and the unexpected release of urine and defecation from the body.

Most people have not been trained to deal with these natural reactions. As a result, individuals who may be justified in using lethal force become incredibly dangerous to themselves and others.

Only intense and consistent training can address this issue.

Let’s be clear: There is nothing inherently wrong with putting guns in the hands of teachers. However, it would be wrong to saddle untrained teachers with the responsibility of protecting our children simply by placing a lethal weapon on their hip.

They need adequate training.

The eight or even 40 hours of training that's typically the standard for entry-level personal defense courses is simply not enough to expect a teacher to be prepared for what an armed situation would require.

Military personnel and police officers immerse themselves in training with firearms defense, and even they get it wrong at times.

So, how should we go about protecting our children and keeping our schools safe? We must place adequately trained armed guards, such as police officers and military men and women, in schools. Such protection would create a deterrent effect for any would-be killer.

The NRA’s report, which outlines security needs and suggested training requirements for keeping our schools safe, is an important step in determining what we can do as a nation to protect our precious children.

Experience demonstrates the way to stop violence is with countervailing force. However, an effective trained response takes serious time, money and resources to create. This responsibility must not be taken lightly.

Law enforcement agencies and the U.S. military allocate significant resources to train their people to defend their country, their communities, their teammates and themselves. In the heated debate over defense and gun laws in recent months, we have overlooked this important fact.

Unfortunately, sweeping gun control laws like those put forward in the Senate do not address the fundamental issues that compromise our safety.

The problem is not guns or magazine capacities, but the evil people who manage to get their hands on guns, regardless of laws.

Sadly, we often consider solutions without thinking beyond next week; in the process, we create a more dangerous society.

We have at our disposal common-sense solutions to the problem of gun violence in our schools. The blanket proposal to arm all teachers without intense training is not one of them.

Let’s move to address the problem with real, viable solutions. After all, this is America, and few things are more important than allocating money to protecting our children and our future.





headline: Boston bombing just the beginning of homegrown terror threats
byline: By Erick Erickson


There is a battle of funny headlines playing out across America.

According to the Wall Street Journal, "Suspects Roused by Jihadist Thought."

Surprisingly, the New York Times headline is "Boston Suspect Cites Islamic Extremist Beliefs as Motive"

The Washington Post, of course, has to take all the religion out of it and blame America."Boston bombing suspect cites U.S. wars as motivation, officials say," reads the Washington Post headline.

Credit where it is due, the Washington Post does a masterful job of blaming America. "[T]he evidence so far suggests they were “self-radicalized” through Internet sites and U.S. actions in the Muslim world." The Internet and American actions did it.

In the past decade we have seen that not all Muslims are terrorists, but just about every terrorist has been a Muslim.

Time magazine is already exploring whether boxing might have had something to do with it.

It is amazing that within a one week period the media went from speculating that right wingers were celebrating Hitler's birthday on tax day to blaming Chechen nationalism to hearing the bomber say he was inspired by Islam to announcing it's not him, it's us to blame.

Had it been a tea partier who launched a terror attack at the Boston Marathon, the media would spend weeks blaming Republicans, conservatives, talk radio rhetoric, and Fox News hosts for inspiring the bombing.

But because the bomber himself says he was inspired by his religious faith and that faith happens to be Islam, the media will ascribe other reasons to explain the attack that are more palatable to the its liberal sensibilities. As often happens in these cases, the media quickly descends into blaming America first.

One of the most insane pieces of the whole past week was from Marc Ambinder, a respected journalist, who explicitly says we should blame America, not Islam, for the bombers.

So stuck in a liberal world view blinding him to reality, along with most of the press corps in America, he can't see to the actual nugget of truth he's trying to grasp for — liberalism.

Let us be very clear here. In the past decade we have seen that not all Muslims are terrorists, but just about every terrorist has been a Muslim.

As more young Muslim men come of age in a post-modern America, the problem of home grown terrorism is going to be far worse than the terrorism we've previously seen. We see this shaping up in Great Britain.

There, the culture has given up on assimilation. It is more and more considered bigotry to think that there might be some quintessentially English characteristics, values, and manners all must embrace. Instead, people can live on the fringe of society without ever having to assimilate.

People, with a natural longing for common culture, concentrate among those most like them. Young Muslim men concentrate with other young Muslim men. In the culture vacuum, they embrace a powerful intoxicant of self-sacrifice for the cause of radical Islam.

The British welfare state allows these young Muslim men to sit on the sidelines as second class citizens, alienated from common British society, without any need to assimilate into British society. It is an inoffensive multiculturalism rotting common culture.

This is beginning to happen here. The melting pot has instead become a pressure cooker.

The Tsarnaev brothers lived in Massachusetts, a state where if Bob wants to be known as Sheila in the public schools, the other kids will get punished for calling Bob . . . well . . . Bob.

Liberalism infests society. The Tsarnaev brothers, like so many immigrants, were not required to assimilate into American society. They were left to do it to the degree they wished on their own as all other immigrants are today. Granted, the younger of the two men was much more assimilated into American life. How much pressure his older brother put on him to abandon American culture in favor of terrorism is something we'll find out about in the coming weeks and months.

Every person wants a sense of belonging. But post-modern America offers no sense of belonging into a greater culture. Each culture is relative.

There is no truth. The very idea of an essential Americanness is racist to many on the left. Left to their own devices, each person in a quest for culture will gravitate to the familiar, the comfortable, and that which elevates the soul with a sense of connection.

Some young blacks, Hispanics, Asians and others left out of society often join gangs to find their sense of community.

Many young evangelicals are more and more embracing a quasi-communal near hippy existence, as if reliving the first days of the church, with other young evangelicals intent on separating themselves from the world.

Young white rich kids are becoming trustafarians. That is, they live a nomadic life of near-poverty, traveling around the world, playing at being poor but all the while actually living off mom and dad’s financial largesse.

Then there are young Muslim men adrift in liberal, post-modern America. Their religion is not, contrary to the political correct, a religion of peace, but of submission.

Many of the Muslims who are most absorbed into their religion intend to fill the cultural vacuum left by the post-modern liberals of the West with Islam. We will all submit one way or the other. Compared to all other religions in the Twentieth and Twenty-first century, only Islam seems to generate people willing to kill for their religion.

If you do not believe me, announce on Twitter you intend to burn the Koran and see what happens. Remember, we are talking about a religion that, if the Obama White House is to be believed, went into international riots over a poorly produced You Tube video and an idiot pastor in Florida.

We have allowed, due to our liberal values and constitutional priorities on free exercise of religion, the one religion on earth that cannot, in its natural state, peacefully coexist with other religions, to migrate across the map.

Instead of pouring into Islam the western values of toleration for other ideas, values, and ways of life as Islam migrated, liberalism decided that not only would it be bigoted to do, we must not even dare confront it or treat it differently from religions that do not produce suicide bombers and international riots.

Now, in America, we have an untamed religion with calls for submission not tempered by the extra 600 years Christianity has had to temper, a liberalism that has left a cultural vacuum wherein many find themselves adrift looking to their own cultural connections to find their place in the world, and young Muslim men who, in that cultural vacuum, look not just to Islam, but an empowering Islam that can fill deep voids through demands for submission.

Boston is just the beginning.





headline: Christians, we must love our Muslim neighbors, too
byline: By Josh Graves


Dr. Amir Arain is a trusted friend. We’ve worked together on several projects in the time I’ve lived in Nashville. Amir is a top Neurologist at Vanderbilt Medical Center and leading professor at Vanderbilt University.

He also happens to be the chief spokesperson on matters of faith and culture for the Nashville Islamic Center. Amir is from Pakistan but is now a U.S. citizen with all the rights and privileges I enjoy. He is as devout to his country, faith, city, and family as I am to mine.

In Dearborn, Michigan—just 20 minutes from where I grew up—some of the most loyal citizens of the U.S. make up the single largest concentration of Arabs in the world, outside of the Middle East. These leaders are doctors, teachers, military servants, and spiritual directors. They are part of the fabric of our nation, the most diverse nation in the history of the world.

I start by describing Amir and Dearborn because I immediately thought of these friends and places as the images, religion, and identities of the two brothers accused of bombing the Boston Marathon emerged in the news media last week.

As a pastor, I find it problematic that so many professing followers of Jesus continue to buy into the myth that most Muslims are hateful, violent, and vengeful people.

We are still barely able to make sense of the horrific and despicable actions allegedly carried out by Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and Tamerlan Tsarnaev. If they are indeed guilty of these crimes (as it appears) their actions represent the worst of human capacity.

The (Wahhabi) segments of Islam that are committed to terrorism, violence, and radical jihad are a major problem and need to be dealt with at every level of life: government, society, religion, development, and education. However, it is not fair to assume that a billion people are violent because of a small minority.

Today, Muslims and Christians make up nearly half the world’s total population. Eighty percent of Muslims around the world do not live in the Middle East and do not speak Arabic.
Islam is as diverse a religion as we have on Planet Earth.

But here, in the U.S., Muslims make up a tiny minority (conservative estimates range from 4-6 million—there are more Detroit Tigers fans than Muslims).

As a pastor, I find it problematic that so many professing followers of Jesus continue to buy into the myth that most Muslims are hateful, violent, and vengeful people. Are we really willing to suggest that 1.2 billion people are evil?

Consider this for a moment: In ancient Israel, during the time of Jesus, Samaritans were a substantial rival religious group to Jews inhabiting a region between Galilee and Judea. Samaritans were like Jews, but not like Jews.

In Jesus’ parable of the “good” Samaritan (Luke 10), he tells the story of two orthodox Jewish leaders who see a fellow Jew beat up on the side of a dangerous road. Both religious leaders look but they don’t see; they choose not to help. Until a Samaritan walks by, the Jew in the ditch has no hope.

The Samaritan comes upon the left-for-dead Jew and has compassion. The Samaritan looks and he sees.

The parable is striking because Jesus essentially challenges his Jewish audience to put themselves in the ditch and imagine who they would least likely expect or desire to rescue them from a precarious situation.

Jesus wanted his audience to see the Samaritan as capable of showing much more mercy than the average Jew would allow.

Jesus wanted his audience to see the Samaritan as a person capable of providing intense mercy.
In addition, Jesus made a Samaritan a hero and he taught and healed in Samaritan regions of Israel.

He also taught, honored, interacted, and healed Samaritan individuals. When Jesus’ disciples wanted to literally kill a group of Samaritans, Jesus rebuked them.

Many leaders today call for Christians to be afraid of Muslims, not to trust “them” because “those people” only want to kill, harm, and destroy Christianity and Western Civilization.
Others, of a different ideological viewpoint, insist that all religions—including Christianity and Islam—are the same; that we are all “traveling up the same mountain, taking different paths.”
Just because I don’t call Amir Arain my brother in the faith, doesn’t mean he isn’t my neighbor.
According to Jesus, everyone is a neighbor, and there’s no one who’s not my neighbor.

Yes, I disagree with Amir on the precise meaning of Jesus’ life and because of this—not in spite of— I believe that the real test of my disagreement with Amir is in the depth of my commitment to loving Amir as Jesus has loved both us.

Because the real test of the Christian faith, in the foreseeable future, is in the church’s willingness to love those who do not subscribe to the Jesus Way.





headline: Westchester County's liberal Journal News drags down Gannett
byline: By Richard Grenell


Gracia Martore, president and CEO of Gannett, probably doesn’t care too much about The Journal News in suburban New York. 

Since assuming the position of Gannett CEO in late 2011, Martore went to work reorganizing the then struggling Gannett, launching a campaign to re-brand the age-old company with an aggressive digital strategy. 

Martore’s sound leadership has also been rewarded by Wall Street with an increasing stock value – something rare for media properties these days.

Since when did it become fashionable for a journalist to criticize exhaustive news coverage of a public outrage?

During her tenure, however, not every cog of Gannett’s machinery has been on the upswing. Foremost among the struggling parts is the once-popular suburban newspaper, The Journal News. The paper's increasingly liberal activism on a variety of issues, most notably gun control, is probably the reason for its declining readership and shredded reputation.

On December 22, 2012, for example, The Journal News published an interactive map of the names and addresses of all the legal handgun owners in Westchester and Rockland counties. 

Twenty eight days later, following a wave of criticism from both the public and local law-enforcement officials, the newspaper removed the interactive map (it later added a snapshot of a gun ownership map without the original full content and interactivity). 

The about-face was seen as a major journalistic faux pas. To make matters worse, several of the houses identified in The Journal News’ original piece suffered burglaries that involved either an attempted or successful theft of a gun-safe. 

Seen at best as liberal activism, and at worst a cheap stunt, the daily paper’s left-wing bias was no doubt an embarrassment to Martore and other Gannett officials. 

The paper’s leadership has repeatedly refused to apologize for or acknowledge their mistake despite having scrubbed the original map from its website. 

In an apparent doubling down on the gun issue, the paper ran a column by Cara Matthews last week, in which she presented the divergent views of Fox News CEO Roger Ailes and MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” co-host Mika Brzezinski —both suburban New York residents—on gun control. 

According to Matthews, the Newtown shooting and the map’s publication together “prompted New York’s elected officials to strengthen gun control laws and allow permit holders to opt out of having their name and address publicly disclosed”—hardly a modest view of The Journal News’ influence. 

Further, rather than presenting the two sides of a divergent public policy issue, Matthews used the opportunity to lambast not just Ailes’ and gun-control critics’ views, but Ailes’ leadership and Fox News in general.

In a strange turn away from the piece’s focus, Matthews writes, “Ailes, 73, keeps a close eye on the network’s shows and isn’t afraid to speak up when he disagrees with something.” 

Really? Active management is now an odd occurrence? Maybe it is in Matthews’ newsroom but it certainly has worked well for the president of the #1 cable channel on television. 

Continuing on the tangent, she attempts to further discredit Ailes’ management style through reference to a disgraced former Fox News Producer Joe Muto – a typical talking point of the left. 

Matthews goes on to whine that Fox News’ coverage of The Journal News map incident was “exhaustive” and “outraged” -- another sure sign that Matthews and The Journal News are on a sinking ship. 

Since when did it become fashionable for a journalist to criticize exhaustive news coverage of a public outrage? 

Ironically, her paper has used no ink to discuss MSNBC’s biased treatment of the issue, a cable news network a Pew Research Study recently concluded fills 85% of its on-air time with opinion.

While the bias may be unsurprising to those familiar with the mainstream media, Gannett’s Martore certainly cannot be happy being on the hook for The Journal News’ liberal agenda. Though the interactive gun permit map was certainly the epitome of the problem, it is far from the only instance of the Journal’s consistent liberal activism. 

Every day The Journal News’ writers fill the news and opinion pages with articles attempting to discredit Republican and conservative candidates and elected officials, without so much as mentioning the follies of their liberal colleagues. 

While Martore’s list of concerns undoubtedly spans topics of far more importance than the activities of a local newspaper with a dwindling circulation, it would be well within Gannett’s interests to bring Martore’s re-branding mindset to their news division and clean house at The Journal News.





headline: Distracted driving killed my wife, don't let it kill yours
byline: By Martin Spinelli


One beautifully clear September morning a few years ago my wife and four-year-old son were parked in their Nissan on the side of highway heading into Canterbury, England, where she worked and where our boy was in day care.

No one knows why she stopped, but her car was several feet on the correct side of the line, she was well within her legal rights to be there and, I’m sure she assumed, “safe.”

At 10:21 that morning a tractor-trailer, an 18-wheeler, a really big truck was traveling at fifty-five miles per hour on that same stretch of road. The trucker, a fifty-four-year-old father of two, had not taken his required driving breaks for three days prior.

My son beat the odds: He survived when I was told to prepare for him dying. 

At 10:22 that truck hit that Nissan with enough force to send it flying, spinning into the air until it came to rest 230 feet away—that’s about one-and-half lengths of an Olympic swimming pool.

The truck was outfitted with all the latest safety features. Its breaks, applied only after the crash, were working as well that day as on the day they’d been installed.

The police report of the crash says that my wife was killed instantly—I’m thankful that she didn’t suffer. Our son, it says, was thrown fifty feet from the car but survived—for this I’m grateful beyond my ability to express.

The police report describes every angle and position, every detail of visibility and the location of every piece of my wife’s car in painstaking scientific detail.But these are just words and numbers, the photos of the crash tell another story.

The one that will stay with me forever is the photo of my son’s little wooden push-bike pulverized to splinters. My son loved that bike. But his new one was better—a big boy’s bike.

The trucker never told the police exactly what happened.Some of the investigators thought he might have been messing with the radio or some papers on his dashboard.Most of the others guessed that he had fallen asleep at the wheel.

He would have felt it when he hit them though, that would have certainly gotten his attention. In the end, he was sentenced to two-and-half years in prison for causing death by dangerous driving.

My son beat the odds: he survived when I was told to prepare for him dying. He pulled himself out of a coma when I was told he’d likely never wake up.

He walked on his own when this seemed unlikely. And, only three months after the crash that killed his mother and should have killed him, he went to a normal, mainstream elementary school when I had been told this would never happen.

The crash also transformed me. At my son’s bedside, pulling him through his recovery, I found real meaning and a sense of genuine purpose for the first time in my life. The fast-track career that had been so important to me before seemed irrelevant compared to my new vocation: being the best father I could possibly be. This was what I was meant to be doing.

My son is now 11-years-old.He plays soccer, has lots of friends, is great at math and amazingly good on the piano.Simply watching him grow up makes me happy every day.

While our story is ultimately a very positive one of recovery and redemption, the incalculable pain, grief and damage that precipitated it could have been so easily avoided if one person had not let their attention slip behind the wheel.

April is Distracted Driving Awareness Month and I’m sharing my story in an effort to reduce the number of needless deaths on the road.

Our tragedy happened in England, but the statistics are virtually the same across the developed world: roughly three deaths in every thousand are the fault of distracted drivers. If you’re driving, drive alert.





headline: The truth about the Kermit Gosnell trial
byline: By Chuck Donovan


Closing arguments are expected next week in the trial of Dr. Kermit Gosnell, the late-term Philadelphia abortionist. As the trial nears conclusion media coverage of the gruesome testimony in the case has intensified.

A coordinated effort by pro-life bloggers and citizens on Twitter managed to break through a mass media cone of silence, and now commentators across the political and pro-life/pro-choice spectrum are offering their perspectives.

Some of those perspectives are startling.So, too, are some of the omissions about the entire chain of events – 40 years long and counting – that Gosnell represents.

Among the startling responses is the claim that anti-abortion policies produced Gosnell’s depredations.

The stories emerging from the Gosnell trial are dark, bloody and remorseful, a repudiation of what health and happiness should be.

In a piece for Slate magazine’s “MoneyBox” blog, Matthew Yglesias declares his sympathy with the view that Gosnell is the logical residue of a legal and business culture in which there are few late-term abortion providers: “Making it difficult to establish an above-board competitive marketplace with multiple legal providers of late-term abortion facilities ensures that the demand for the procedure will be pushed into low-quality channels.” (A rare example, by the way, of a liberal commentator embracing a robust health care marketplace and linking quality to it.)

Apart from its cold calculus, this perspective on Gosnell overlooks the more basic reason why there isn’t a thriving marketplace of doctors willing to kill babies nearly or fully capable of living outside the womb: The practice itself is in no way one of the arts of medicine.

Few are drawn to it because few people with rarefied medical skills see the fulfillment of their years of training in wrenching apart a baby limb from limb.

For mothers and babies alike, the stories emerging from the Gosnell trial are dark, bloody and remorseful, a repudiation of what health and happiness should be.

Put more simply, what Gosnell was doing was objectively wrong and obviously hurtful.

Moreover, lawlessness – and not a set of pro-life laws – is what gave birth to Gosnell’s crimes, and that spirit of lawlessness, of no limits and no scruples, dates back to the period before Roe. v. Wade.

Tim Carney of the Washington Examiner has laid out in detail how Gosnell vaulted into public view in 1972 through his involvement in another gruesome episode, the “Mother’s Day Massacre.”

In full view of public television cameras, Gosnell brought 15 poor Chicago women to Philadelphia to undergo second-trimester abortions induced by inserting a mass of razor-sharp plastic coils into their wombs.

The so-called “super coil” method was the invention of Harvey Karman, an ex-con with a diploma-mill Ph.D., who was a darling of International Planned Parenthood.

That Gosnell was able to participate in a highly publicized event that left nine of its 15 “subjects” with major medical complications and suffer no penalty was a harbinger of the path he would take over four decades.

Legal abortion resembles the back alley because the two overlapped to an overwhelming degree.

In the early days of legal abortion, Mary Calderone, at the time national medical director of Planned Parenthood, reported an estimate that 90 percent of illegal abortionists pre-Roe were, in fact, physicians. Then-Planned Parenthood president Alan Guttmacher’s estimate was 80 percent.

The miracles of modern perinatology, the ability to save the lives of babies born as early as 24 weeks’ gestation, the marvels of fetal surgery that have inspired specialties at children’s hospitals across the country, including Philadelphia’s pioneering unit – these are the spires and sinews of medical progress.

The Gosnell trial is a stark reminder of another fact. The women who entered the infernal portal of 3801 Lancaster Ave suffered from an array of debilities, chief among them the absence of hope.

In a sex-saturated society availed of an arsenal of pregnancy-preventing and –destroying drugs, devices and, yes, abortion clinics, they turned to a facility that should have shocked and repelled them from the moment they saw its battered and blood-stained environs.

Some would argue that their neighborhoods lack enough family planning centers; more importantly, they lack enough families.There is a relationship poverty that runs deeper than any other kind. Low expectations can be a hard form of bigotry.

Despite this, in the neighborhood of Kermit Gosnell there were advanced hospitals, Catholic pregnancy and adoption services, and two pregnancy care centers: clean, well-lit places where they and their children would have been valued and cared for.

Do we need more such centers, more highlighting of their work, more funding?Yes, and we need more obstetricians as well, and reform of a tort law system that is driving out quality physicians by the hundreds and leaving in place some whose victims are too impoverished and too ashamed to sue them.

Incredibly, part of the agenda of NARAL is to drive pregnancy care centers out of business or block their advertising. They label them “fake clinics.”

Meanwhile, the Obama administration continues to pursue its over-the-top “preventive services mandate,” fully aware that one of its primary effects may be to close religious hospitals that care for millions of America’s poor and hundreds of thousands of expectant mothers.

Building multiple late-term abortion clinics in search of a bazaar of absolute choice is the last thing our nation’s poor neighborhoods need.

We would do well instead to seek a new birth of compassion, reinvestment of time and energy in the Hippocratic ideal of “doing no harm,” and the affirmation of the equal value of every human life.





headline: What I saw at Margaret Thatcher's magnificent funeral
byline: By Rep. Marsha Blackburn


They stood a dozen deep. Young and old, they lined the streets behind the flag-draped barricades. The rain began to fall almost as if the sky itself mourned the loss of a leader. Inside the cathedral, the music began as guests arrived and were seated.

From around the world they came to pay tribute to the former Prime Minister of Great Britain, Baroness Margaret Thatcher. They were slow to seat themselves as they shared their common reverence for two now departed among them: Lady Thatcher and President Reagan.

It was my distinct honor to be among them and offer my respects to a woman who became a transformational world leader.

She grew up as the grocer's daughter and lost two races before her constituency chose her to represent them in the House of Commons.

Perhaps the most poignant moment came as Queen Elizabeth II walked up the steps and to her seat without assistance. It was one strong woman saluting another.

Her rise to Prime Minister was not without it's hardships, but it was done with great grace. In fact, grace might be the watchword of her life's journey.

She led, she fought, she nurtured, and she inspired all with that stern womanly grace now synonymous with "the Iron Lady."

Baroness Thatcher is for me one of those great conservative leaders. She, along with President Reagan, believed and acted on the principle that one who agreed with 80% of your fight was your ally, not your enemy.

She held true to her conservative principles in the face of overwhelming public opinion. Her determination in freedom and freedom's cause truly changed the world. She was a noble leader for noble causes.

As heads of state began to arrive, I wondered what Lady Thatcher would have thought of it all. The service was reverent and beautifully delivered, as she would have wanted.

Perhaps the most poignant moment came as Queen Elizabeth II walked up the steps and to her seat without assistance.

It was one strong woman saluting another.

It was dignity personified.

As the final blessing was pronounced, the sun broke through the clouds, brightening the glass windows, and bathing the cathedral in light.

It was a homecoming for a daughter of faith.

As I head back home, I know I'll keep her legacy close as we continue the conservative fight she championed.





headline: The trouble with presidential libraries
byline: By Juan Williams


Congratulations to President George W. Bush!

His new presidential library is a tribute to his leadership. But that does lead to a question.

As the fight gets underway to claim the Obama Presidential Library – the University of Hawaii versus the University of Chicago – is the original intent of presidential libraries as archives of an administration’s papers is being lost?

The new reality is that the libraries are a tourist hot spot for a president’s political fans. The original goal was to allow the federal government to keep control of presidential records and as a matter of public trust holding former presidents accountable for their actions.

The libraries are built entirely with private money. And an endowment of private money is also required to help with operational costs. But the bill for managing all of the libraries goes to taxpayers. It is part of the budget of the National Archives and Records Administration. And the libraries’ budgets are the responsibility of the NARA.

As a frequent visitor to presidential libraries to do research for books I can tell you that these sites rarely highlight stories about questionable actions by any president.

In December of 2010 the Congressional Research Service reported that the public-private partnership behind presidential libraries opens the government’s checkbook to being used to glorify ex-presidents. The CRS said it is “unclear” which part of a presidential library and its exhibits are the work of private funders and which part has the imprimatur of the federal government.

As a frequent visitor to presidential libraries to do research for books I can tell you that these sites rarely highlight stories about questionable actions by any president.

And several critics have noted that when the former president or any of his family remains alive they are given tremendous power over controlling the content of the library even as taxpayers pay the bills.

Former presidents can bar documents and even information about controversial incidents from public access for up to 12 years after their presidency. And too many documents remain classified by government agencies, often under pressure from former presidents and their friends.

The result is that presidential libraries are now often “a huge, glitzy, glamorous museum of spin – a giant campaign commercial in museum form,” as Benjamin Hufbauer, the author of ‘Presidential Temples: How Memorial and Libraries Shape Public Memory,’ told the Los Angeles Times this week.

The Bush Library’s curators are sensitive to the growing problem with presidential libraries. They have made a point of letting the public make up their own minds as they offer a fairly straight presentation of the facts of controversial episodes from the decision to go to war in Iraq to the government’s role in Hurricane Katrina.

And then there is the smell of corruption.

President Clinton’s library in Arkansas was built with donations from several foreign governments and corporations, including the government of Saudi Arabia. Some of those donations arrived while he was still in office.

On his last day in the White House President Clinton issued a pardon for a billionaire commodities trader, Marc Rich. Rich’s former wife, Denise, donated $450,000 to the Clinton library. That aroused suspicion that it is possible to buy a presidential pardon.

Rep. John Duncan Jr. (R-Tenn.) was prompted by the Rich pardon to propose legislation requiring any donation of more than $200 to a presidential library be publicly reported. And Duncan’s bill has punch.

It makes it a crime for “contributors or fundraising organizations to knowingly and willfully submit false information or omit material information.” Duncan was also concerned about donations from foreign leaders and the potential effect those donations could have on a president’s decisions at a time when the president is least accountable – the end of his or her term.

Rep. Duncan denies that he introduced the bill to embarrass President Clinton. The complete list of donors to the Clinton Library was made public voluntarily but only during Hillary Clinton’s confirmation hearings to become secretary of state.

The Duncan bill, a similar version of which was first introduced in 1999, as the Clinton library was being built, has been up for a vote in ’02, ’07, and ’09.

But it has not passed.

The Senate almost approved in 2008 but former Sen. Ted Stevens (R-Alaska) blocked it because he felt it targeted George W. Bush’s presidential library in Texas.

“I introduced and have supported this legislation under both Democratic and Republican Presidents,” Duncan wrote in a press release last month before the opening of the new Bush library.

The Bush library foundation has promised to release the names of all its donors – unless they requested anonymity.

But the time has come for Congress, the archives and the presidents to take a look at the growth and use of presidential libraries that began with Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s library in Hyde Park, N.Y.





headline: Gun debate won’t end until there is respect on both sides
byline: By Trevor Burrus


This week the Senate is debating gun control, and we’ll see whether calmer heads can prevail. As I said in Fox News Opinion once before, the gun control debate is fundamentally a culture debate, dominated by extreme voices on both sides.

Senators Joe Manchin III (D-W. Va.) and Pat Toomey (R-Pa.) have compromised on an amendment that expands background checks to gun shows and online sales. The bill wisely prohibits creating a gun registry.

Not only is a gun registry already illegal, but it would be foolish to allow the government to track every gun owner.

Gawker illustrated this when it published a list of “all the a**holes who own guns in New York City.” Later, the upstate New York newspaper The Journal News printed a similar list.

The dramatic behavior of Gawker and The Journal News hurts the gun-control cause. Shaming gun owners will bolster resistance to all proposals, reasonable or not. As the culture debate rages on, Democrats and their supporters cannot continue to demonize and misunderstand gun owners.

As the culture debate over guns rages on, Democrats and their supporters cannot continue to demonize and misunderstand gun owners.

Mayor Michael Bloomberg laughably tried to bridge the culture gap with ads featuring a stereotyped gun enthusiast – identified by his rural setting, pickup truck, and Cabela’s-inspired wardrobe – whose finger is wrapped around the shotgun’s trigger, violating one of the fundamental tenets of gun safety.

Gun owners also feel exasperated when elected officials show their ignorance of guns. Recently, Diane DeGette (D-Co.) seemed not to know that gun magazines are reusable, echoing the famous description by Carolyn McCarthy (D-N.Y.) of a barrel shroud as the “shoulder thing that goes up.”

A few weeks ago, actor Jim Carrey released a satirical video called “Cold Dead Hand” on the website Funny or Die. Carrey places himself on the set of “Hee Haw,” resorting once again to the tired cliché that gun-rights supporters are ignorant yokels. He goes on to attack the size of gun-owners’ manhoods, and close the video with a one-finger salute.

Carrey previously established the communication baseline of this debate by taking to Twitter to call gun-rights supporters “heartless” and saying that those who purchased an “assault rifle” after Newtown have “very little left in their body and soul worth protecting.”

Carrey’s stereotyping of gun-rights supporters, and his rage at those who resist suggested reforms are perfect examples of “gun disgust,” the term I used in my previous piece to describe those who give guns the same emotional response as a dirty public restroom. Under this view, guns contaminate society, and thus deaths by guns are somehow worse than deaths by other instruments.

Swimming pools are far more lethal than “assault weapons,” yet I don’t see Jim Carrey tweeting insults at pool owners (perhaps because he is one).

According to the FBI, all rifles killed 323 people in 2011. “Assault weapons” are a subset of rifles and thus killed less than 323 (unfortunately, the data is not deep enough to say how much less). By comparison, 137 children under the age of 15 died in swimming pools and spas in the summer of 2012 alone.

So should Mr. Carrey make a new video slamming swimming pool owners as purveyors of death? No, because that kind of rhetoric has no place in efforts to protect our children. We cannot bridge the cultural divide until a respectful tone is adopted. That goes for both sides.

Gun-rights supporters need to stop characterizing all gun-control advocates as ultimately wanting to “ban guns.” Most do not. For gun control advocates, it would help to disavow the rhetoric of people like Jim Carrey and to treat gun-rights supporters with respect rather than elitist disdain.

If both sides can do this, some common ground might be possible. Expanding background checks and allowing for better mental health record-keeping could keep guns out of the hands of some dangerous people.

Yet gun-control supporters should also acknowledge that, in many places around the country, the National Instant Background Check System is far from instant, and there are many people mistakenly prohibited or unduly delayed in purchasing firearms. Although some gun-control advocates cannot fathom why someone would want to own a firearm, they should sympathize that such problems are a real cost to those who enjoy owning and using firearms.

Those are the steps to productive gun-law reform, and none of them involve calling anyone “heartless.”





headline: Boston bombing just the beginning of homegrown terror threats
byline: By Erick Erickson


There is a battle of funny headlines playing out across America.

According to the Wall Street Journal, "Suspects Roused by Jihadist Thought."

Surprisingly, the New York Times headline is "Boston Suspect Cites Islamic Extremist Beliefs as Motive"

The Washington Post, of course, has to take all the religion out of it and blame America."Boston bombing suspect cites U.S. wars as motivation, officials say," reads the Washington Post headline.

Credit where it is due, the Washington Post does a masterful job of blaming America. "[T]he evidence so far suggests they were “self-radicalized” through Internet sites and U.S. actions in the Muslim world." The Internet and American actions did it.

In the past decade we have seen that not all Muslims are terrorists, but just about every terrorist has been a Muslim.

Time magazine is already exploring whether boxing might have had something to do with it.

It is amazing that within a one week period the media went from speculating that right wingers were celebrating Hitler's birthday on tax day to blaming Chechen nationalism to hearing the bomber say he was inspired by Islam to announcing it's not him, it's us to blame.

Had it been a tea partier who launched a terror attack at the Boston Marathon, the media would spend weeks blaming Republicans, conservatives, talk radio rhetoric, and Fox News hosts for inspiring the bombing.

But because the bomber himself says he was inspired by his religious faith and that faith happens to be Islam, the media will ascribe other reasons to explain the attack that are more palatable to the its liberal sensibilities. As often happens in these cases, the media quickly descends into blaming America first.

One of the most insane pieces of the whole past week was from Marc Ambinder, a respected journalist, who explicitly says we should blame America, not Islam, for the bombers.

So stuck in a liberal world view blinding him to reality, along with most of the press corps in America, he can't see to the actual nugget of truth he's trying to grasp for — liberalism.

Let us be very clear here. In the past decade we have seen that not all Muslims are terrorists, but just about every terrorist has been a Muslim.

As more young Muslim men come of age in a post-modern America, the problem of home grown terrorism is going to be far worse than the terrorism we've previously seen. We see this shaping up in Great Britain.

There, the culture has given up on assimilation. It is more and more considered bigotry to think that there might be some quintessentially English characteristics, values, and manners all must embrace. Instead, people can live on the fringe of society without ever having to assimilate.

People, with a natural longing for common culture, concentrate among those most like them. Young Muslim men concentrate with other young Muslim men. In the culture vacuum, they embrace a powerful intoxicant of self-sacrifice for the cause of radical Islam.

The British welfare state allows these young Muslim men to sit on the sidelines as second class citizens, alienated from common British society, without any need to assimilate into British society. It is an inoffensive multiculturalism rotting common culture.

This is beginning to happen here. The melting pot has instead become a pressure cooker.

The Tsarnaev brothers lived in Massachusetts, a state where if Bob wants to be known as Sheila in the public schools, the other kids will get punished for calling Bob . . . well . . . Bob.

Liberalism infests society. The Tsarnaev brothers, like so many immigrants, were not required to assimilate into American society. They were left to do it to the degree they wished on their own as all other immigrants are today. Granted, the younger of the two men was much more assimilated into American life. How much pressure his older brother put on him to abandon American culture in favor of terrorism is something we'll find out about in the coming weeks and months.

Every person wants a sense of belonging. But post-modern America offers no sense of belonging into a greater culture. Each culture is relative.

There is no truth. The very idea of an essential Americanness is racist to many on the left. Left to their own devices, each person in a quest for culture will gravitate to the familiar, the comfortable, and that which elevates the soul with a sense of connection.

Some young blacks, Hispanics, Asians and others left out of society often join gangs to find their sense of community.

Many young evangelicals are more and more embracing a quasi-communal near hippy existence, as if reliving the first days of the church, with other young evangelicals intent on separating themselves from the world.

Young white rich kids are becoming trustafarians. That is, they live a nomadic life of near-poverty, traveling around the world, playing at being poor but all the while actually living off mom and dad’s financial largesse.

Then there are young Muslim men adrift in liberal, post-modern America. Their religion is not, contrary to the political correct, a religion of peace, but of submission.

Many of the Muslims who are most absorbed into their religion intend to fill the cultural vacuum left by the post-modern liberals of the West with Islam. We will all submit one way or the other. Compared to all other religions in the Twentieth and Twenty-first century, only Islam seems to generate people willing to kill for their religion.

If you do not believe me, announce on Twitter you intend to burn the Koran and see what happens. Remember, we are talking about a religion that, if the Obama White House is to be believed, went into international riots over a poorly produced You Tube video and an idiot pastor in Florida.

We have allowed, due to our liberal values and constitutional priorities on free exercise of religion, the one religion on earth that cannot, in its natural state, peacefully coexist with other religions, to migrate across the map.

Instead of pouring into Islam the western values of toleration for other ideas, values, and ways of life as Islam migrated, liberalism decided that not only would it be bigoted to do, we must not even dare confront it or treat it differently from religions that do not produce suicide bombers and international riots.

Now, in America, we have an untamed religion with calls for submission not tempered by the extra 600 years Christianity has had to temper, a liberalism that has left a cultural vacuum wherein many find themselves adrift looking to their own cultural connections to find their place in the world, and young Muslim men who, in that cultural vacuum, look not just to Islam, but an empowering Islam that can fill deep voids through demands for submission.

Boston is just the beginning.





headline: Why weren't Watertown residents told to get their guns?
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


Before the capture of Dzhokar Tsarnaev, with the heroic police manhunt for him in full swing in Watertown, Massachusetts, Governor Deval Patrick and public safety officials admonished residents there and in surrounding communities to stay inside, lock their doors and answer only for uniformed police officers. 

These steps, while perhaps wise for many residents of Massachusetts, also suggested that all residents of Massachusetts were defenseless and should act accordingly.

One piece of information, for example, was left out of every press conference that took place in the aftermath of the Boston Marathon bombings: If you have a licensed firearm, make sure it is within reach, that it is loaded and that your family members are nearby. 

The reason that residents of Watertown and Boston were not told to keep their guns close by is only because of the liberal political tide that seeks to take guns out to sea with it.  

This directive, in my opinion, would have been a proper public safety message and public health initiative to safeguard many homes in Watertown and the metro-Boston area.

It also would have avoided the unfortunate subconscious message to Bostonians that they cannot or should not take steps to protect their own lives and their loved ones and their homes in the future, in one very clear way: By exercising their Second Amendment rights to own firearms and to use them when gravely threatened or attacked.

It strains the imagination to wonder why any adult in Watertown, Massachusetts who does not currently own a gun and who lived through the horror of a terrorist hiding out in that city would not be applying for a firearms permit this coming week. So, too, for Boston. And, of course, citizens around the country would do well to learn the same lesson.

The reason that residents of Watertown and Boston were not told to keep their guns close by (or to congregate in the dwellings of gun owners) is only because of the liberal political tide that seeks to take guns out to sea with it. 

Almost inexplicably, gun control efforts from the president and members of Congress continue, despite recent mass attacks with a knife (in Texas, where 14 innocent people were slashed) and in Massachusetts, where bombs made of crock pots, ball bearings and nails brought horrific casualties.

Were Dzhokar Tsarnaev or someone of similar ilk to seek a home to enter in the Boston area or any other town or city in America, I can say with near certainty that an NRA sticker clearly visible on the front door or an adjacent window would make him choose another door to break down. And, in any case, a gun in the house, at the ready, would have been the best defense against being another of his victims.





headline: The Supreme Court, the 'anti-prostitution pledge' and free speech
byline: By Dana Perino


On Monday, the Supreme Court will hear a case that has gained little attention in the media, but has earned support from a diverse set of groups. At the heart of the case is the question of how much power the government can assert to curtail constitutional rights when it provides grants and other discretionary funding to private organizations.

The case, USAID v. AOSI, challenges a provision of the United States Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria Act of 2003 that forces groups receiving funds under the Act to have a policy “explicitly opposing prostitution.” Let’s just stipulate that no one, especially a group that wants to help people fight poverty and disease, supports prostitution. That’s not the issue at hand in this case. 

This is what is objectionable: even if an organization merely wishes to remain silent on the issue, as is the case for AOSI, the government forces the organization to express its agreement publicly with the government’s viewpoint. And the government prohibits the organization from saying anything inconsistent with the government’s viewpoint, even in its private activities. 

No group, whether it's Republican, Democratic, religious, libertarian, or independent should have to adopt the government’s ideology as a condition of accepting federal funds.

How can this not be a violation of free speech rights? The government has a variety of means at its disposal to ensure public funds are being spent appropriately. When it chooses to fund a particular program it has the power to impose limitations so that the money is used efficiently.

When the government funds private parties to deliver a message, it has the right to ensure that message is delivered appropriately.

The policy requirement attached to this act goes well beyond the scope of the government's authority. The act does not simply enlist recipients’ private organizations to deliver a message on behalf of the federal government. Rather, it compels organizations to state the government’s viewpoint as their own. That means that the Act restricts the views recipients of federal funding may express even in their purely private speech. 

The implications of this case go far beyond this particular group or issue. Under the government’s view, it may override the First Amendment’s protection of private speech simply because an organization accepts public funds.

No group, whether it's Republican, Democratic, religious, libertarian, or independent should have to adopt the government’s ideology as a condition of accepting federal funds. Private organizations are just that – private.

To limit their speech in the way the government seeks to do in this case would erode the foundation of our democracy and seriously hinder the free flow of ideas that have contributed to innovation and progress throughout the world.

To learn more about this case, visit www.pledgechallenge.org.





headline: Christians, we must love our Muslim neighbors, too
byline: By Josh Graves


Dr. Amir Arain is a trusted friend. We’ve worked together on several projects in the time I’ve lived in Nashville. Amir is a top Neurologist at Vanderbilt Medical Center and leading professor at Vanderbilt University.

He also happens to be the chief spokesperson on matters of faith and culture for the Nashville Islamic Center. Amir is from Pakistan but is now a U.S. citizen with all the rights and privileges I enjoy. He is as devout to his country, faith, city, and family as I am to mine.

In Dearborn, Michigan—just 20 minutes from where I grew up—some of the most loyal citizens of the U.S. make up the single largest concentration of Arabs in the world, outside of the Middle East. These leaders are doctors, teachers, military servants, and spiritual directors. They are part of the fabric of our nation, the most diverse nation in the history of the world.

I start by describing Amir and Dearborn because I immediately thought of these friends and places as the images, religion, and identities of the two brothers accused of bombing the Boston Marathon emerged in the news media last week.

As a pastor, I find it problematic that so many professing followers of Jesus continue to buy into the myth that most Muslims are hateful, violent, and vengeful people.

We are still barely able to make sense of the horrific and despicable actions allegedly carried out by Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and Tamerlan Tsarnaev. If they are indeed guilty of these crimes (as it appears) their actions represent the worst of human capacity.

The (Wahhabi) segments of Islam that are committed to terrorism, violence, and radical jihad are a major problem and need to be dealt with at every level of life: government, society, religion, development, and education. However, it is not fair to assume that a billion people are violent because of a small minority.

Today, Muslims and Christians make up nearly half the world’s total population. Eighty percent of Muslims around the world do not live in the Middle East and do not speak Arabic.
Islam is as diverse a religion as we have on Planet Earth.

But here, in the U.S., Muslims make up a tiny minority (conservative estimates range from 4-6 million—there are more Detroit Tigers fans than Muslims).

As a pastor, I find it problematic that so many professing followers of Jesus continue to buy into the myth that most Muslims are hateful, violent, and vengeful people. Are we really willing to suggest that 1.2 billion people are evil?

Consider this for a moment: In ancient Israel, during the time of Jesus, Samaritans were a substantial rival religious group to Jews inhabiting a region between Galilee and Judea. Samaritans were like Jews, but not like Jews.

In Jesus’ parable of the “good” Samaritan (Luke 10), he tells the story of two orthodox Jewish leaders who see a fellow Jew beat up on the side of a dangerous road. Both religious leaders look but they don’t see; they choose not to help. Until a Samaritan walks by, the Jew in the ditch has no hope.

The Samaritan comes upon the left-for-dead Jew and has compassion. The Samaritan looks and he sees.

The parable is striking because Jesus essentially challenges his Jewish audience to put themselves in the ditch and imagine who they would least likely expect or desire to rescue them from a precarious situation.

Jesus wanted his audience to see the Samaritan as capable of showing much more mercy than the average Jew would allow.

Jesus wanted his audience to see the Samaritan as a person capable of providing intense mercy.
In addition, Jesus made a Samaritan a hero and he taught and healed in Samaritan regions of Israel.

He also taught, honored, interacted, and healed Samaritan individuals. When Jesus’ disciples wanted to literally kill a group of Samaritans, Jesus rebuked them.

Many leaders today call for Christians to be afraid of Muslims, not to trust “them” because “those people” only want to kill, harm, and destroy Christianity and Western Civilization.
Others, of a different ideological viewpoint, insist that all religions—including Christianity and Islam—are the same; that we are all “traveling up the same mountain, taking different paths.”
Just because I don’t call Amir Arain my brother in the faith, doesn’t mean he isn’t my neighbor.
According to Jesus, everyone is a neighbor, and there’s no one who’s not my neighbor.

Yes, I disagree with Amir on the precise meaning of Jesus’ life and because of this—not in spite of— I believe that the real test of my disagreement with Amir is in the depth of my commitment to loving Amir as Jesus has loved both us.

Because the real test of the Christian faith, in the foreseeable future, is in the church’s willingness to love those who do not subscribe to the Jesus Way.





headline: Ninety days of destruction from the Obama White House
byline: By Wayne Allyn Root


The economic news in America has gone from bad to worse.

First, we found out the jobs numbers are collapsing. Then retail sales figures were released- they show across the board contraction.

Next, we found out U.S. business inventory figures were a disappointment.

Finally, consumer confidence not only collapsed, but it was the largest miss from expectations in U.S. economic history. 2 words explain it all: "Ninety days."

Creating jobs in Obama's America is like trying to grow healthy plants in a nuclear blast zone.

Ninety days is all it took to put the U.S. economy into a coma, to destroy any chance of recovery. 90 days defined by the Obama "Axis of Evil” -- Taxation, regulation, unionization, litigation, IRS intimidation, demonization, and government strangulation. The last 90 days of this Axis of Evil have sealed our fate.

There are no new jobs. There will be no new jobs. Creating jobs in Obama's America is like trying to grow healthy plants in a nuclear blast zone. Obama has turned the U.S. economy into a “Hostile Work Environment.” I call it Obamageddon.

Look at the toxic results of what has happened in the last deadly 90 days. Last month we added a miserable 88,000 jobs. 660,000 Americans dropped off the job rolls...in one month.

Ninety million working-age, able-bodied Americans are no longer in the workforce.The workforce participation rate is the lowest since 1979. For men it’s the lowest since 1948 (when record keeping began).Disposable income in January was the lowest since 1959 (since record-keeping began).Under Obama we’re truly back to the future.

Twenty-percent of eligible adults are on food stamps. Fourteen million on disability. Record-setting numbers of Americans are breaking into their own retirement accounts just to survive. Student loan debt is a disaster -- with defaults up 36% from a year ago. 16.4 million Americans live in poverty…in the suburbs.

You’re on your own as the American economy descends into darkness, overwhelmed by debt and entitlements.

Obama and the mainstream media have been blowing smoke for months, but the gig is up. No recovery is coming.

Let’s take a look at what Obama did to “save us” in the past 90 days:

- Federal income taxes went up dramatically on business owners (ie jobs creators).

- Payroll taxes went up.

- Exemptions and deductions were taken away.

- ObamaCare taxes took effect. State and local taxes went up across the USA.

- Gas prices went up drastically -- even as we learned Obama’s EPA wants new gas taxes.

- Grocery prices soared.

- Health insurance soared. For many small businesses we learned it will double next year.

- Electric rates went up -- as we learned that Obama’s EPA doubled biofuel taxes, while also trying to eradicate the coal industry and ban oil drilling.

- IRS audits went up dramatically on business owners (which means higher accountant and legal bills).

Add it up: There’s no money left. Even “the rich” feel poor. The middle class is drowning. Small business is under attack. How can anyone spend if they have no money left after Obama's relentless taxes? Where is the money coming from to start a business?

But it gets even worse. In those same 90 days, the government created 6,118 new rules and regulations. That’s 68 per day.

To produce that many job-killing regulations, Obama must have sweatshops populated with slave labor, whipped and kept in chains, working in shifts 24 hours per day. Obama is literally killing the spirit of business owners and taxpayers.

Obama is like a drug addict with giant bills to pay and no income. He has to find a way to pay for his food stamps, disability and unemployment society.

The bill to keep this Ponzi scheme going gets bigger by the hour. But with 90 million adults no longer working, and everyone who is willing to work being robbed to pay for a nation of deadbeats, who is left to jump-start the economy? Who is left to create jobs? The answer is…clearly…no one.

Even more shocking and depressing are Obama’s priorities. He claims we desperately need to raise all these taxes.

Yet, our president had no problem giving away $250 million to the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, $500 million to the Palestinians, $1.5 million in grant money to study why lesbians are fat (I’m not kidding), and billions of dollars in income tax credits to illegal aliens (who never paid income taxes in the first place).And you wonder why people are angry and disillusioned?

This has been 90 days for the history books. Ninety days that have made an economic collapse much more likely than a recovery. Ninety days that has put capitalism and American exceptionalism on life support.

Ninety days of the Obama "Axis of Evil” showcasing what one man, supported by a blind, adoring liberal-biased media, can do to snuff out ambition, drive, work ethic, creativity, inspiration and enthusiasm -- all in the name of equality, fairness and social justice.

Ninety days that will live in infamy. My book "The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide" is out today. Just in time -- because now it's a fight for survival.



Wayne Allyn Root is capitalist evangelist, entrepreneur, and Libertarian-conservative Republican. He is a former Libertarian vice presidential nominee. Wayne's latest book is "The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide: Secrets to Protecting Your Family, Your Finances, and Your Freedom." For more, visit his website: www.ROOTforAmerica.com. Follow him on Twitter@WayneRoot.



headline: Lessons about capitalism from my blue-collar, butcher father
byline: By Wayne Allyn Root


My father, David Root, was a blue-collar butcher. But he was wise beyond his economic status in life.His wisdom of 40 years ago is still timely and points to the reasons for our economic crisis and decline today. An incident from a few days ago sums up everything wrong with the U.S. economy under President Barack Obama.

Last Tuesday (April 2nd) voters across America went to the polls for local elections. My wife, Debra, was one of those voters. She drove to the polling place in her Cadillac Escalade- a big car that is necessary to drive a brood of 4 home-schooled kids (and often their friends) to lessons, hobbies and sports, as well as for lugging groceries and supplies for a family of 6.

As Debra got out of the car, another pulled up and parked next to her. A small car. The driver got out, looked at her and in an angry, mean-spirited, bitter way, commented, “What a big, expensive car. You must be here to vote Republican.” Sneering, he turned his back and walked away.

Forty years ago my butcher father taught me lessons about wealth that led to my extraordinary success in this great country. He said, “Son, I’d love to hate rich people. But no one poor has ever given me a job.”

This little comment sums up everything wrong with America and the U.S. economy under Obama.

This president has damaged the American Dream- perhaps beyond repair. This President has created a bitterly divided society, a nation filled with anger, hate, rage, jealousy and envy. This President (the man who uttered “You didn’t build that”) has created an army of “have-nots” who instead of being inspired to work harder, aim higher, and do extraordinary things, see the successful as the enemy, and merely want to take what we have.

That man never asked how hard my wife and I have worked for the past 22 years of marriage to afford that big car. He didn’t ask how many hours I’ve put in.

He didn’t ask how much money I’ve risked to build my businesses (the answer is my entire life savings- again and again), how many jobs I’ve created, or how many lives my success and wealth has enriched. It never occurred to him that the blue-collar autoworkers at Cadillac are mighty glad there are still Americans with the money to buy Escalades. 

Forty years ago my butcher father taught me lessons about wealth that led to my extraordinary success in this great country. He said, “Son, I’d love to hate rich people. But no one poor has ever given me a job.” Wiser words were never spoken. 

My dad told me over and over again that rich people provide most of the jobs in this country. That rich people pay most of the taxes.

Not only had a rich man given him his first job, but a rich man had invested the money for my dad to open his own butcher store.

It was rich customers who walked in the store to buy all his high-quality meat. It was rich customers who supported our family and paid our bills.

It was all those rich customers who enabled my father to buy a home.

And he pointed out, it was those same rich customers who would someday write a letter of recommendation when his son applied for acceptance at Columbia University. 

My dad was right about all of it. We lived the American Dream. My dad went from minimum wage butcher to butcher store owner. I graduated Valedictorian of my class, got those letters of recommendation from rich customers of my dad’s, and graduated from Columbia University Class of ’83 (alongside my classmate Barack Obama).

Every step of the way my butcher father taught me to respect and honor wealthy people. He taught me that peopleearntheir wealth, deserve their success. He told me to be inspired by seeing wealthy people, their big homes, and big cars. He taught me that I could and would become one of them someday- because we lived in America, the greatest country in world history.

But he warned it could only happen if I used the outsized wealth and success of others to give me energy, enthusiasm and inspiration. And, only if I was never jealous, envious, or bitter and only if I out-studied, out-worked, out-created, out-dreamed, and out-hustled the people who at this moment had more wealth than the Root family. He guaranteed me if I did all that, I’d be rewarded. And I was.

As a kid, holding my dad’s hand, when an expensive car drove by, he made a point to say, “Son, that will be you someday.” Today, that blue-collar father says to his son, “Look at that expensive car. Who did he take advantage of to get it? I’ll bet he’s a greedy Republican not paying his ‘fair share’.”

That change in attitude explains why the U.S. economy and society as a whole, is in decline under Obama. It explains why things are getting worse, not better. Why jobs are being killed. Why small businesses on Main Street are in distress. Capitalism is what made America great. You can only achieve success and wealth by admiring, respecting, and earning it; not by taking it from those that do, or by asking government to stop them from achieving it.

My father made one other point that Republicans need to stress.He said“The Republican party is not the party of the rich.It is the party of anyone who wants the opportunity to be rich. Or who wants their children and grandchildren to do better than they did.”

Truer words were never spoken. Thank you dad. I love you.



Wayne Allyn Root is capitalist evangelist, entrepreneur, and Libertarian-conservative Republican. He is a former Libertarian vice presidential nominee. Wayne's latest book is "The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide: Secrets to Protecting Your Family, Your Finances, and Your Freedom." For more, visit his website: www.ROOTforAmerica.com. Follow him on Twitter@WayneRoot.



headline: Associated Press says 'adios' to 'illegal immigrant' and regard for rule of law
byline: By Bob Dane


George Carlin once observed, “by and large, language is a tool for concealing the truth.” He may be giving us that wry head cock right now after the Associated Press has decided to recommend that newsrooms refrain from using the term “illegal immigrant.” Their use of the more precise term “illegal alien” vanished some time ago. 

Ensuring that moral judgment does not bleed into news reporting is a worthy goal for all free press, but shaping words to fit politically correct molds is simply another form of bias. Scrapping the term “illegal alien” or “illegal immigrant” in order to placate powerful lobbies surrenders the language to drive an agenda and interjects opinion into the news.

Journalistic guidelines dictate that disclosing a subject’s personal information -- including immigration status -- is not always integral to the story. But when it is, readers deserve clarity, not obfuscation.

Readers deserve clarity, not obfuscation.

Yet, many newspapers have begun referring to illegal aliens as “undocumented workers.” The problem with that term is that with a few keystrokes, the illegality -- the breaking of the law -- is magically erased. “Illegal” disappears and with it, so too does regard for the rule of law. The claim is made that using the term "illegal'" presumes guilt but newspapers seem fine ignoring guilt when reporting even on broad classes of aliens who brazenly self-identify as residing in the U.S. illegally. 

Can’t have it both ways folks.

The addition of the word “undocumented” suggests that those who have violated U.S. immigration laws are simply inconvenienced by not having the proper papers. But many illegal aliens do have documentation – it just doesn’t happen to rightfully belong to them. Finally, the term “workers” implies that all are gainfully employed, which many are not. But for the record, the seven million illegal aliens who do work are employed illegally and occupying jobs that rightfully belong to Americans.

The alternative use of “undocumented immigrants” is just as empty. These aren’t immigrants and this isn’t immigration. America is suffering from a policy of chaos and a flood of 12 million lawbreakers. Swapping the term “alien” for “immigrant” when referring to those who have broken the law is offensive to many legal immigrants. The distinction between legal and illegal is important. Coming to the United States the right way is a badge of honor for most immigrants.

There is no getting around it. The term “illegal alien” is the most legally precise, descriptive term in the lexicon. It delineates between one of only two possible categories; one either has legal status to be on U.S. soil or one is residing here illegally. “Illegal” means prohibited by law. Yes, entry without inspection into the U.S. is prohibited. And “alien” is a term that refers to a person who is not a citizen of the country. The term is well defined in 8 U.S.C. Section 1101. It is used by legal professionals across the board including the United States Supreme Court. It’s ok to say “illegal alien.” 

Use it, but use it correctly. Don’t say someone is an illegal alien without the facts. That’s unacceptable and you’ll wind up in court. If based on due diligence, you have reason to believe the subject of a story is an illegal alien because credible sources have indicated he/she may be, use “alleged” illegal alien. But when the facts prove it and the circumstances are obvious, don’t be coy. 

For example, when referring to 500 people at a rally holding “Illegal and Proud of It” signs, your readers will appreciate you reporting it accurately as a crowd largely composed of illegal aliens. Don’t water down stories about amnesty legislation for illegal aliens with references to “undocumented workers.” 

Why? 

Because amnesty legislation isn’t about giving needed documents, it’s about changing the law to erase the laws that were broken.

Why go through the fuss of changing the term “illegal alien” anyways? Altered to even the most preposterous euphemism we all know what it means – a person is here when he/she is not supposed to be. Leave well enough alone and avoid the hollow substitutes because ultimately, it takes more effort to conceal the truth than to reveal it.





headline: Did Holder mislead Congress about targeting reporters like James Rosen?
byline: By Karl Rove


In his speech at the National Defense University Thursday, President Obama said, “Journalists should not be at legal risk for doing their jobs. Our focus must be on those who break the law.”

Maybe it’s time for the president to have a heart-to-heart with his attorney general, Eric Holder.

NBC News is reporting that Mr. Holder “signed off on a controversial search warrant that identified Fox News reporter James Rosen as a ‘possible co-conspirator’ in violations of the Espionage Act and authorized seizure of his private emails,” per NBC conversations with a law enforcement official.

Eric Holder might have recently misled Congress in a profound way.  Some might even say he lied.

In the case of the government’s subpoena for the phone records of as many as 100 Associated Press editors and writers, Mr. Holder left the decision for a deputy to make after he recused himself. 

But if NBC News is right, then the attorney general himself green-lighted the FBI to seek a subpoena for Mr. Rosen’s private emails in the spring of 2010.

If true, then Mr. Holder has a difficulty. He might have recently misled Congress in a profound way. Some might even say he lied.

On May 15, before the House Judiciary Committee, Congressman Hank Johnson (D-Ga.) asked the attorney general, “We also have an old law that would allow for prosecution of anyone who published the classified information, isn’t that correct?”

In the course of a rambling answer, Mr. Holder said, “You've got a long way to go to try to prosecute people—the press for the publication of that material. This has...not fared well in American history." 

So far, so good: Mr. Obama and Mr. Holder apparently agree. "The focus should be on those people who break their oath and put the American people at risk, not reporters who gather this information. That should not be the focus...of these investigations," the attorney general went on to say.

But Mr. Holder also proclaimed, "With regard to the potential prosecution of the press for the disclosure of material, that is not something I've ever been involved in, heard of, or would think would be wise policy."

But that’s exactly what the government was trying to do in the case of James Rosen, then a Fox News reporter on the State Department beat, now Fox News’ chief Washington correspondent. 

The FBI sought Mr. Rosen’s phone records and private emails because they alleged there was “probable cause to believe” Mr. Rosen was a “co-conspirator and/or aider and abettor…committing the criminal offense…”

If NBC is right and Mr. Holder approved going after Mr. Rosen, then the attorney general has a lot of explaining to do to Congress. 

House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte might well want to ask Mr. Holder to appear again and explain why he said targeting journalists was “not something I've ever been involved in, heard of, or would think would be wise policy” after he had heard of it, had been involved in it, and had signed off on it as a matter of policy.



Karl Rove is a Fox News political analyst and a former senior adviser and deputy chief of staff to President George W. Bush. He is the author of "Courage and Consequence: My Life as a Conservative in the Fight" (Threshold Editions, 2010) and helped organize the political action committee American Crossroads.



headline: The real reason Obama tapped Susan Rice for national security adviser
byline: By K.T. McFarland


President Obama tapped UN Ambassador Susan Rice Tuesday to serve as our nation's next national security adviser.

Tuesday morning my reaction was why appoint Susan Rice as national security adviser? She will be a DISASTER.

Here's why: I spent seven years working for the most successful NSC adviser in history, Henry Kissinger.

I watched him conceive new policies, negotiate with foreign leaders, ride herd over the bureaucracy, massage the press and foreign policy intelligentsia and work behind the scenes with congressional leaders.

President Obama is rewarding Susan Rice for being a loyal (if incompetent) soldier.  

Susan Rice can’t do any of those things.

She has zero credibility with the media, on Capitol Hill, with the foreign policy community and foreign leaders, and is so badly tarnished by the Benghazi scandal that she walks into the job on Day One weak and wounded.

The most obvious problem is her disastrous performance on the Sunday talk shows peddling the administration’s fairy tale on Benghazi; when she was either complicit in the cover-up or incompetent.

Either she knew what really happened and deliberately lied to the American people or she was a mere actress who read the script she was given and didn’t know enough to question whether the words she spoke were accurate.

Rice might have been able to overcome the Benghazi debacle if she had other strong credentials, for example being a senior military officer like Colin Powell and Brent Scowcroft, or a respected academic like Henry Kissinger and Zbig Brzezinski. But Susan Rice is none of these.

When the spotlight was on her at the U.N. she was an ineffective ambassador who couldn't get Russia or China on board to deal with Syria or impose strict sanctions against Iran.

Not only did she fail to persuade those key members of the Security Council, she didn't know it until after the votes on sanctions were taken!

Benghazi was supposed to be her audition for the Secretary of State job -- go on all the Sunday talk shows and be the Obama administration’s primary spokesman.

She was so eager for the try out that she didn't stop and ask why they wanted her. The decision to send someone from the administration to appear on all five talk shows is a decision made at the highest levels of the White House.

It should have been the Secretary of State, or maybe Secretary of Defense, or CIA chief, or NSC Adviser or White House Chief of Staff – they were part of the decision process.

Susan Rice was the one senior administration official who knew nothing about events leading up to Benghazi and the attack itself, yet the White House asked her to go on those shows?

Alarm bells should have gone off in her head!

I checked their schedules and most of the other senior officials were in Washington and available that morning. It’s just that they were smarter than Rice and realized it was a poisoned chalice.

So what is Obama thinking with the Rice appointment? He’s doubling down and circling the wagons. He's rewarding Rice for being a loyal (if incompetent) soldier. He is hanging tough on the scandals and claiming that he knew nothing about them until he read about them in the papers.

On the other hand, maybe Obama's appointment of Rice is smarter than it looks on the surface.

By appointing Rice to the NSC job the president can invoke executive privilege and claim she doesn’t have to testify on Capitol Hill. And even if she does talk about Benghazi, at some point, she will certainly be a loyal soldier if she is now sitting just steps from the Oval Office.

But despite what the president might want the Benghazi isn't over, not by a long shot.





headline: Obama thinks we won the War on Terror and it's time to move on
byline: By K.T. McFarland


President Obama delivered what was billed by the White House as a “major” speech on national security Thursday at the historic National Defense University. In short, Mr. Obama thinks the War on Terror is over, and he won it. There may be a few final details to mop about, but it's time to move on to more important things.

The speech was typical of Mr. Obama: Open with a broad sweep of history from the beginning of the republic to today.

Follow that with a laundry list of all the great things he has done to reverse the bad things his predecessor did.

Brush failures under the rug, blame them on others, or marks them as the inevitable course of history.

Maybe Thursday's speech wasn't so much about foreign policy as domestic politics.

Then finish with uplifting rhetoric, adding in a dash about the greatness of America. 

You walk away feeling you’ve been at a great meal but are somehow still hungry. The problem is there wasn’t much meat on those bones. 

The only new thing the president did discuss was his drone policy and targeted killings. Even then, he didn't clarify much.

On the one hand, the president said drone strikes have killed “dozens of skilled Al Qaeda” fighters and taken them off the battlefield. Mr.Obama claims drone strikes are legal, effective and save American lives since we don’t have to put our boots on the ground. From that you'd assume drone killings are here to stay -- we kill bad guys at no risk to ourselves.

But on the other hand the president wants to limit their use --and turn to them only if there is no chance of capturing the terrorists, and only if no civilians will be hurt. Under those circumstances it's hard to see us ever using drone strikes again. 

Frankly, it's a muddle.

If the drone strikes have been as effective as Mr. Obama claims, why are there more terrorists in more places than before as has Al Qaeda and its affiliates have set up shop in new countries? And if Al Qaeda has spread, why limit the drone strikes?

It’s as if the more drone strikes we have, the larger Al Qaeda grows. Maybe they’re not connected, but it certainly adds more confusion than ever about Team Obama's drone policy.

As for the rest of the speech, there was nothing new. He gave the boilerplate Obama talking points. 

- He ended the Iraq War and is winding down in Afghanistan. 

- He killed Usama bin Laden, and decimated Al Qaeda's core leadership.

- He wants to try terrorists in civilian courts and close Gitmo, but Congress won't let him.

- He has repaired America’s alliances and restored our standing in the world. America is safer because of Obama.

So why did Mr. Obama give this speech? And why did the White House bill it as a major foreign policy address, the first one of his second term? 

Why give a speech that focused on smaller issues like drone strikes and Gitmo, but avoided completely the bigger issues of nuclear proliferation, Iran and the Middle East?

Maybe Thursday's speech wasn't so much about foreign policy as domestic politics.Maybe it was an attempt to divert attention away from the scandals of Benghazi, the IRS, the targeting of the AP and now Fox News that have dominated the headlines and threaten to derail Mr. Obama's second term agenda.

It wasn’t much of a success as a foreign policy speech. But it was a complete failure as a political diversion.





headline: Hope for the dead
byline: By Judge Andrew P. Napolitano


What does freedom have to do with rising from the dead?

When America was in its infancy and struggling to find a culture and frustrated at governance from Great Britain, the word most frequently uttered in speeches and pamphlets and letters was not safety or taxes or peace; it was freedom.

Two acts of Parliament broke the bonds with the mother country irreparably. The first was the Stamp Act, which was enforced by British soldiers writing their own search warrants and rummaging through the personal possessions of colonists looking to see whether they had purchased the government’s stamps. The second was the imposition of a tax to pay for the Church of England, which the colonists were forced to pay, no matter their religious beliefs.

Today it seems the power of the government continues to expand and the freedom of the individual continues to shrink.

The Stamp Act assaulted the right to be left alone in the home, and the tax for the Church of England assaulted the freedom to choose to support one’s own means of worship. The two taxes together caused many colonists to realize they needed to secede from England and form their own country in which freedom would be protected by the government, not assaulted by it.

Today it seems the power of the government continues to expand and the freedom of the individual continues to shrink. The loss of freedom comes in many forms. Sometimes it is direct and profound, as when the government stops you from doing what you formerly had the freedom to do -- like choose your own doctor and your own health care insurance or choose not to have health care insurance. Sometimes it is more subtle -- like when the government prints money to pay its bills and, as a result, all the money you already have loses much of its value. And sometimes the government steals freedom without you knowing it -- like when federal agents write their own search warrants, authorizing themselves to learn of your computer use or medical or banking records; and they never tell you what they’ve done.

Freedom is the ability of every person to exercise his own free will, rather than be subject to the will of someone else. Free will is the essence of humanity, and humanity is God’s greatest gift. When the government affirmatively takes away freedom, the government violates the natural law; it prevents us from having and utilizing the means to the truth. Your moral ability to exercise your free will to seek the truth is your natural right, and the government may only morally interfere with the exercise of that right when you have used fraud or force to interfere with the exercise of someone else’s natural rights.

We know from the events 2,000 years ago, which Christians commemorate and celebrate this week, that freedom is the essential means to discover and unite with the truth. And to Christians, the personification, the incarnation, the perfect manifestation of truth is the Son of God.

On the first Holy Thursday, Jesus attended a traditional Jewish Passover Seder. Catholics believe that at that last supper, He performed two miracles so that we could stay united to Him. He transformed ordinary bread and wine into His own body, blood, soul and divinity, and He empowered His disciples and their successors to do the same.

On the first Good Friday, the government executed Him for claiming to be the Son of God. He had the freedom to reject this horrific event, but He exercised His freedom so that we might know the truth. The truth He manifested is that His acceptance of the destruction of His body would demonstrate to us that we can liberate our souls from the slavery of sin and our free wills from the oppression of the government. Three days later, on Easter, that manifestation was complete when He triumphed over death by rising from the dead.

Easter is the linchpin of human existence: With it, life is worth living, no matter its cost or pain. Without it, life is meaningless, no matter its fleeting joys or triumphs. Easter has a meaning that is both incomprehensible and simple. It is incomprehensible that a human being had the freedom to rise from the dead. It is simple because that human being was and is God. Easter means that there is hope for the dead. And if there’s hope for the dead, there’s hope for the living.

But, like the colonists who fought the oppression of the king, we the living can only achieve our hopes if we have freedom. And that requires a government that protects freedom, not one that shrinks it.

Do we have such a government today?







headline: In IRS mess, how we can believe anything Team Obama is telling us?
byline: By Karl Rove


On May 10, days before the Treasury Inspector General released his report acknowledging the political profiling at the Internal Revenue Service, Lois Lerner, Director of the IRS Exempt Organizations Division, told a meeting of the Exempt Organizations Committee of the Tax Section of American Bar Association that “between 2010 and 2012, we started seeing a very big uptick in the number of 501(c)(4) applications we were receiving.”IRS employees “centralized work” on these applications “for efficiency and consistency.”

It just so happened the groups in question were Tea Party and conservative groups.

Now that the Inspector General has confirmed in its May 14 report this “centralization” was based on “inappropriate criteria,” White House advocates continue to use the shoddy justification that the political targeting was all a result of well-intentioned efforts by the IRS to cope with a “remarkable influx of applications” from 501(c)(4)s ” (David Plouffe, 6/2/13), as the IRS was “flooded with applications” (David Axelrod, 6/2/13).

Trouble is, the Internal Revenue Services’ own records show the number of applications for tax-exempt status as either a 501(c)(4) or 501(c)(3) have not been growing, but declining.

The IRS' own records show that the number of applications for tax-exempt status as either a 501(c)(4) or 501(c)(3) have not been growing, but declining.

Below are the numbers for the “Closures of Applications for Tax-Exempt Status, by Organization Type and Internal Revenue Code Section” for Fiscal Years 1990 to 2012 (the latest fiscal year for which the IRS provides such data).

Contrary to the impression fostered by Team Obama and Ms. Lerner, the combined total for tax-exempt applications closed by the IRS for both (c)(4) and (c)(3) groups peaked at 87,638 in FY 2007 and had declined 38% by FY 2012, when the IRS closed 54,522 tax-exempt applications of which 2,774 were for 501(c)(4) status and 51,748 for 501(c)(3) status.

The number of 501(c)(4) applications closed did hit 2,774 in FY 2012, up from FY 2011 and FY 2010. But in FY 2010 when the IRS started targeting Tea Party and conservative groups, the number of application closures had fallen 9% to 1,741 from the previous fiscal year’s total of 1,922.

Since many Tea Party and conservative groups applied for 501(c)(3) status, it’s also interesting to note that those applications dropped from 70,624 in FY 2009 to 59,945 in FY 2010, a drop of 15%.

So where is the “remarkable influx of applications” that left the IRS “flooded” in 2010?

Where is the “very big uptick” that led someone in the IRS to order the targeting of conservative and Tea Party groups as an “efficiency measure?”

Team Obama shows remarkable message coordination and discipline, but when everyone is spouting the same prevarications, it undermines the credibility of the administration’s defense and all involved in delivering it.

How can they expect us to believe them on anything else?



Source: Closures of Applications for Tax-Exempt Status, by Organization Type and Internal Revenue Code Section for Fiscal Years 1990-2012.



Karl Rove is a Fox News political analyst and a former senior adviser and deputy chief of staff to President George W. Bush. He is the author of "Courage and Consequence: My Life as a Conservative in the Fight" (Threshold Editions, 2010) and helped organize the political action committee American Crossroads.



headline: Buyers, beware: UN Arms Trade Treaty will regulate individual gun ownership
byline: By John Lott


The U.N.'s Arms Trade Treaty, which seemed dead last July, is beginning to wrap up negotiations. The Obama administration is committed to getting it passed . Secretary of State John Kerry confirmed:“The United States is steadfast in its commitment to achieve a strong and effective Arms Trade Treaty."

The treaty was resurrected on Nov. 8 – the very day after President Obama’s re-election.Very conveniently, that the Obama administration delayed the U.N. vote in favor of renewing negotiations delayed until the president was no longer constrained by public opinion.

The Arms Trade Treaty will regulate individual gun ownership all across the world. Each country will be obligated to “maintain a national control list that shall include [rifles and handguns]” and "to regulate brokering taking place under its jurisdiction for conventional arms.” In fact, the new background check rules approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee include just those rules -- a registration system and a record of all transfers of guns.

The treaty pretends that individual weapons smugglers are the main problem.

But nations themselves will be responsible for enforcing the rules.That means Iran, China, Russia – the leading countries for the truly troubling parts of the international arms trade – are supposed to curb it. Does anyone actually believe these nations will actually enforce these regulations against themselves?

Democracies are a different story. Many of their civilians have freedoms to lose. And they are much more transparent on whether they are actually honoring the rules that apply to their governments.

Just like with gun control, in general, it is only the “good guys” who will obey the new rules.The U.N. Arms Trade Treaty, if passed, would only be effective against those countries that choose to obey them.

The treaty pretends that individual weapons smugglers are the main problem. But governments, not private individuals, are the primary source of weapons. For example, the FARC guerrillas fighting in Colombia get their guns from the Venezuelan government.

Unsurprisingly,the U.N. treaty provisions are the long-time favorites of American gun control advocates: registration and licensing of guns and ammunition, along with restrictions on the private gun transfers. Unfortunately, these expensive measures have a long history of failing to curb crime wherever they have been tried and primarily end up disarming law-abiding gun owners.

The treaty pushes gun registration and licensing as a way to trace those who supply these illicit weapons. Yet, to see the problem with these regulations, one only needs to look at how ineffective they have been in solving crime. Canada just ended its long gun registry last year, as it was a colossal waste of money.

Indeed, it is a costly scheme. Beginning in 1998, Canadians spent a whopping $2.7 billion on creating and running a registry just for long guns. With more people and more guns in the United States, the estimated costs for a similar registration scheme for 13 years would be about $67 billion.

Gun control advocates have long claimed registration is a safety issue. Their reasoning is straightforward: If a gun is left at a crime scene, and it was registered to the person who committed the crime, the registry will link it back to the criminal. 

Unfortunately, it rarely works out this way. Criminals are seldom stupid enough to leave behind crime guns that are registered to themselves.

As to restrictions on the private transfers of guns, the most common type of regulationdiscussed in the U.S. today involves background checks. Yet, whether one is talking about the Brady Act or the so-called gun show loophole, economists and criminologists who have looked at this simply don’t find evidence those regulations reduce crime. It may even increase crime, as fewer would-be victims acquire guns. Unfortunately, just like criminal gangs in the U.S. obtaining guns, it is simply wishful thinking that a United Nations treaty – no matter how well intended – can do much to stop rebel groups from getting weapons.

Obama likes to believe that his re-election gives him a mandate for sweeping changes. Well, he certainly lacks a mandate for these new gun restrictions, as he tried so hard to avoid the U.N. treaty until after the election.

The good news is that even if President Obama signs the U.N. Arms Trade Treaty, it is unlikely to be ratified by the US Senate. Nonetheless, by promoting gun control elsewhere in the world, it might eventually lead to more pressure for gun control here at home.







headline: When it comes to marriage, government should divorce itself
byline: By Dr. Keith Ablow


With the Supreme Court now hearing cases centering on the legality of a federal ban on gay marriage and California’s ban on gay marriage, the real way our nation should address marriage rights is to get government out of the marriage business, altogether.

It never made sense to have state or federal government intrude into personal affairs by giving it the power to sanction and legitimize the loving commitment of one individual to another. That is a matter for the adults involved, who should share their intentions and vows in a ceremony with family, friends and any religious institutions they choose (or not), then sign any financial documents they see as being appropriate and, perhaps, exchange rings. End of story.

If two adults are mature enough to get married, they should be mature enough to envision and codify how they will deal with their finances, should that marriage end.

The government’s only interest should be in enforcing child support and fair child custody and visitation for each parent, in the event of a dissolution of the (government-free) marital bond. Making certain that children do not descend into poverty, and spouses are not left without parental rights, would then be the only proper function of the state related to marriage—both triggered only when marriages end. This would be no different than the state’s current role in enforcing child support, custody and visitation in non-married couples.

The legal sanctioning of, or refusal to sanction, any loving union between adults is inherently laden with cultural values. And if it is determined that love and commitment should be the sole driving force behind state and federal marriage laws, then it is utterly and completely illogical to deny five people who love one another the right to marry as a group. Heterosexual government-sanctioned marriage leads logically to homosexual government-sanctioned marriage, which leads logically to polygamy. Anyone who suggests otherwise is suggesting that government should play favorites and show prejudice.

If two men can marry, despite having no biological ability to reproduce (which some argue is the government’s stake in heterosexual marriage) and without having both genders represented as role models in the household (which others argue is the government’s stake in heterosexual marriage), then certainly two men and a woman can marry. No one can credibly argue that three people cannot be in love, and the three-parent structure would offer the children of this marriage a mother and two fathers—role models of both genders, with 50 percent more earning capacity than a two-parent family and many advantages, in terms of built-in child care.

Government should not play favorites or show prejudice. And the proper next step for government to take is a major step out of our personal lives. This can be done by neither showing a preference for or against marriages, nor deciding who should marry whom. Instead, that should be left to people and their loved ones and their religious institutions, if any.

All state, federal and corporate (as in, health insurance) preferences shown married couples, as opposed to those who are not married, are inherently prejudicial. There ought to be no distinction between the rules for filing taxes, whether one is married, or not. Every individual should file taxes under the same set of rules. There ought to be no government rubber stamp via government-sanctioned marriage of whether someone has the right to act on behalf of another individual who is too ill to make decisions. That should all be codified in a prenuptial agreement or other legal documents. There ought to be no automatic inheritance of assets by spouses, which should be codified in a will.

The gay marriage debate is a sideshow in the bigger debate we must have: Why was government so intrusive as to be involved in marriage, in the first place, and shouldn’t government divorce itself from the concept of sanctioning marriage, altogether?





