
There is considerable contemporary interest in the physics that drives filamentation of intense, femtosecond laser pulses in transparent media, and the accompanying generation of a supercontinuum (SC) whose wavelengths span the ultraviolet to the near infrared.1,2 The drive to study such nonlinear optical phenomena is fueled by a host of tantalizing potential applications3,4,5 in optical microscopy and imaging. Nonlinear optical effects are important in contemporary photonic functionalities like the generation of ultrashort pulses, exercising control over the frequency spectrum of laser light, ultrafast optical switching, and signal processing. Many of these applications are limited by weak nonlinearities, demanding high pumping thresholds. Localized field enhancement might offer an effective solution by boosting the fast, non-resonant, nonlinear material response. Surface plasmon resonances (SPRs) in metal nanostructures, like nanorods and nanospheres, are known to exhibit strong field localization on ultrafast timescales,6,7,8,9 potentially providing such an enhancement mechanism. Metal nanostructures exhibiting shape- and size-dependent SPRs have recently begun to be utilized to tailor optical responses in waveguides,10,11 nano-antennas,7 and photovoltaic devices.12 Their size- and shape-tuned SPRs also offer promise of lowering the pumping threshold for SC generation.13 Preliminary work, which is mostly theoretical, initiated to probe how SPRs might affect SC generation has yielded limited insights into the enhancement mechanism.14,15,16,17 Moreover, it has been difficult to experimentally realize the conditions for which theoretical calculations have been performed.
We report in this letter results of systematic experiments on SC generation in water doped with gold nanoparticles of different shapes, each of which exhibits a pronounced size- and shape-dependent extinction peak due to SPR-induced scattering. As much as 161 meV (63 nm) increase in the blue extent of the SC is observed in the case of doped water whose SPR overlaps the incident laser spectrum. Our experiments are conducted at incident laser intensities that lie near the threshold for formation of a single filament in water. Consequently, we are able to use a simple phenomenological self-phase modulation model to rationalize our results, taking cognizance of plasma contributions to the third-order susceptibility of water along with SPR-induced field enhancement.
We characterized the colloidal suspensions of gold nanoparticles by recording linear extinction spectra. SC and filamentation experiments were performed using an amplified Ti:Sapphire laser system generating ∼35 fs pulses centered at 1.54 eV (805 nm) at 1 kHz repetition rate. The spectral extent, △ν, of the pulses (full width at 10% of the maximum intensity) was 111 meV = 58 nm. These pulses were focused within a 1 cm long fused silica cuvette by a 5 cm focal length lens to a beam diameter of ∼10 μm. Typical peak power used in our experiments was in the Ppu = 60−170 MW range, sufficient to generate only a single stable filament, as confirmed by determining the threshold for SC generation and by inspecting the transmitted SC spot in the far-field.18 Lower power level also prevents unwanted heating of the nanoparticles.
The three aqueous gold colloids used here contained either monodispersed gold nanospheres (Sigma Aldrich) or nanorods (Nanopartz, Inc., USA) in distilled water, with <100 mM residual surfactant concentration.19 Linear extinction spectra of our nanoparticle-doped water are shown in Fig. 1; they exhibit prominent extinction peaks due to SPR-induced scattering,20 at Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm; nanorods with diameter, d = 23 nm and length, l = 97 nm), Er = 2.01 eV (617 nm; nanorods with d = 37 nm and l = 62 nm), and Er = 2.24 eV (554 nm; nanospheres with d = 78 nm). Typical doping concentration was 6 × 1010/ml, corresponding to very low volume filling factor of ∼10−6, necessary to maintain inter-particle separation of ∼2 μm so as to avoid inter-particle interactions. There is one previous study on how SC generation is affected by doping water with silver nanoparticles whose SPR 3 eV (400 nm),14 but in this case the SPR value is far from the excitation wavelength. We have chosen well characterized19 particles with sizes such that the SPR peak was located either very near, or very far, from the incident pulse spectrum centered at 1.54 eV (805 nm).
Figure
Fig 1.
Linear extinction spectra of nanoparticle-doped water and pure water. The three gold nanoparticle dopants are characterized by size- and shape-dependent strong extinction peaks due to SPR induced scattering. Vertical dashed lines mark the spectral extent (△ν = 111 meV = 58 nm) of the incident pulse.
View first occurrence of Fig. 1 in article.
Figure 2a shows a typical image of light scattered from a filament generated using nanoparticles whose Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm) at Ppu = 60 MW. The predominantly red color of the filament away from the focus reflects both the spectral content and the higher scattering cross-sections around Er. No significant change in the filament shape was observed for different dopants. Transmitted SC spectra are shown in Fig. 2b. They reveal significant spectral broadening in doped water compared to SC spectra from pure water; the incident pulse spectrum is also shown for comparison. In all cases, we found the broadening to be asymmetric about 1.54 eV (805 nm), exhibiting a prominent shorter-wavelength side. The asymmetry is much larger in the case of doped water. The most striking feature is the relatively flat SC spectrum with significant enhancement in △ν for doped water whose Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm). △ν was 368 meV (173 nm), a value that is as much as 161 meV (63 nm) broader than that observed in pure water. The SC spectrum from water peaks at 1.52 eV (816 nm), that is, on the lower-energy side, whereas blue shifted peaks are obtained upon doping. Interestingly, the SC generated with dopant SPR at Er = 2.01 eV (617 nm) is relatively weak, with narrower △ν of 240 meV (122 nm). To quantify the changes in SC spectra in doped water we plot differential spectra, △S/Sin = (S−Sin)/Sin (S, Sin, are the SC and the incident laser spectra, respectively), in Fig. 2c. There is at least four-fold enhancement in the emission from doped water with Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm) beyond 1.65 eV (752 nm) compared to undoped water, increasing rapidly at higher photon energies even though the filling factor used is extremely low. The increase in the spectral extent [Fig. 2d] is only weakly dependent on the SPR position, yielding relatively size- and shape-independent enhancement, a highly desirable scheme from an applications viewpoint.
Figure
Fig 2.
(a) Scattered light image of a single filament generated in water doped with gold nanoparticles with SPR at Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm) at incident laser power, Ppu = 60 MW. (b) Normalized transmitted SC spectra from nanoparticle-doped water with SPR resonances (Er) at 1.44 eV (861 nm; black, △ν = 368 meV = 173 nm), 2.01 eV (617 nm; red, △ν = 240 meV = 122 nm), and 2.24 eV (554 nm; blue, △ν = 338 meV = 164 nm). The SC spectrum from pure (undoped) water (green, △ν = 207 meV = 107 nm) and the incident laser spectrum (magenta, △ν = 111 meV = 58 nm) are also shown for comparison. (c) Differential SC spectra, △S/Sin, and (d) spectral extent (△ν) for nanoparticle-doped and pure water. The spectra are shifted vertically for clarity; horizontal dashed lines mark the shifted zero positions. The spectral broadening is maximum for Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm) where the SPR overlaps the incident spectrum, whereas it is minimum for Er = 2.01 eV (617 nm), due to the considerable scattering losses in the visible range.
View first occurrence of Fig. 2a in article.
View first occurrence of Fig. 2b in article.
View first occurrence of Fig. 2c in article.
View first occurrence of Fig. 2d in article.
To rationalize our observations we adopt a simple phenomenological approach. We take SC generation in the threshold region to be essentially due to the modulation of the phase of the electric field of an ultrashort laser pulse as it propagates through a nonlinear medium, generally known as self-phase modulation (SPM).21,22,23 SPM is mainly a nonlinear process governed by the real part of the third-order susceptibility, χ(3). In pure water, the two main factors24 contributing to χ(3) are (i) laser induced distortion of the electronic distribution (Kerr nonlinearity25), χel(3) = 2×10−14 esu, and (ii) free electron or plasma-induced susceptibility, χpl(3) = math, where ωp is the intensity independent plasma frequency. The factor β(I) represents the change of plasma density with intensity (I), and γ is the electron-electron collision rate.24,26,27 Under our experimental conditions, χpl,water(3) ∼ 10−13 esu, indicating that SC generation in pure water is mainly due to plasma generation.
There has been a theoretical report predicting substantial spectral broadening in aqueous colloids containing silver nanoparticles.15 However, the filling factor (0.1) and the value of χ(3) ∼ 10−8 esu of the silver nanoparticles considered are both extremely high. Under such conditions inter-particle interactions and nonlinear absorption losses due to the imaginary part of χ(3) are not negligible, and, hence, it would not be possible to realize these conditions experimentally while pumping at 1.54 eV (805 nm). The measured value of χel(3) for gold nanoparticles with SPR at 1.55 eV (800 nm) dispersed in water at a concentration of 1011 particles/ml under resonant excitation (I ∼ 106 W/cm2) is ∼10−16 esu, yielding effective χel(3) only marginally different from undoped water.25,28,29 However, the observed SC spectra show substantial broadening, suggesting contributions from other nonlinear processes. The colloidal suspensions we have investigated exhibit prominent SPR resonances (Fig. 1) which are known to yield local field enhancement of factor ∼10.20,30 Such high local fields lead to further local enhancement in χpl,water(3). Expectedly, the enhancement will be maximum if the SPR overlaps the incident spectrum, as is, indeed, observed by us. Therefore, increased χpl,water(3) due to SPR enhanced31 plasma generation seems to be the dominant nonlinearity responsible for the SC generation we observe in gold nanoparticle doped water. It is interesting to note that plasma generation can sometimes be suppressed, for instance, by doping water with proteins that act as electron scavengers.32,33
As a first order approximation, assuming an instantaneous material response and no significant changes in the pulse profile as it propagates or self-focuses, we consider the induced time-dependent frequency modulation, △ω(t)∝χ(3)math, where E is the amplitude of the electric field of a Gaussian pulse. The generated SC spectrum is then obtained by Fourier transforming the resultant electric field.22,23 The SPM-modified incident spectrum and the induced time-dependent phase, ϕ(t), thus calculated for our pump pulse are shown in Fig. 3. The spectrum and the phase of a transform limited 35 fs incident pulse are also shown. Since the induced phase modulation is symmetric about the pulse arrival time, the spectral broadening is also symmetric about the excitation spectrum. Though such a simple phenomenological approach can explain the role of plasma generation in SC generation from water, it cannot explain the spectral asymmetry we observe. Narrow longer-wavelength emission cannot be attributed to absorption as it is negligible (Fig. 1) except for nanoparticles with Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm). In this case, also the difference in absorption on the longer and shorter-wavelength side is only a factor of two whereas the difference in spectral extent is many-fold.
Figure
Fig 3.
(a) Comparison of experimental (circles) and calculated (solid lines) incident spectra and SC spectra from doped water with Er = 1.44 eV (861 nm). The observed spectral broadening is asymmetric about the pulse spectrum, with larger extent on the shorter-wavelength side. The spectrum (red) calculated by taking into account SPM as well as self-steepening (SPM + SS) reproduces the asymmetry well whereas that calculated with only SPM is essentially symmetric. (b) Temporal phase (ϕ) of the transform limited Gaussian incident pulse and of the pulse in the presence of SPM (blue) and SPM with self-steepening (SPM + SS, red). Note that self-steepening gives rise to asymmetric phase with a steeper trailing edge, resulting in increased broadening on the shorter-wavelength side.
View first occurrence of Fig. 3a in article.
View first occurrence of Fig. 3b in article.
Our SPM model uses the slowly varying amplitude approximation: the rapidly changing electric field and nonlinear polarization are not accounted for. Since we use pulses of only 35 fs duration, the simple SPM model is, clearly, a gross oversimplification. After propagation through a nonlinear medium with positive intensity dependent index change, a pulse would display self-steepening22,23,34,35 of its trailing edge. Since the trailing edge of the phase modulation results in stronger shorter-wavelength emission, self-steepening results in an asymmetric SC spectrum (Fig. 3). We have tried to reconstruct the observed SC spectrum of doped water (Er = 1.44 eV = 861 nm) by assuming an asymmetric Gaussian phase change. The comparison between the calculated and the observed spectrum is shown in Fig. 3a. The time dependent phase profile used in our calculation is also shown in Fig. 3b. As expected the trailing edge is steeper compared to the leading-edge of the pulse. Any resonant enhancement of the nonlinearity is limited by the transient response time of the interaction, yielding a gradually varying trailing-edge, thus suppressing the shorter-wavelength broadening. In case of SPR, the population relaxation is governed by the scattering processes or by radiative damping.36,37 Therefore, it is amenable to estimation from the spectral width of the SPR [Fig. 3a] and is found to be less than 35 fs, which is typical for gold nanoparticles. Thus the SPR-induced enhancement does not adversely affect either the self-steepening of the trailing edge nor the resulting shorter-wavelength enhancement. As the SC is mainly generated in water, which is transparent in the spectral range considered here (Fig. 1), and as SPR lifetime is shorter than our pulse duration, the instantaneous response approximation is valid for our experiments. Gratifyingly, even though our theoretical approach is simplistic, it provides an adequate qualitative description of the enhancement mechanism we observe. Formulation of a quantitative description is a formidable task: it would require solution of a time-dependent nonlinear wave equation.
So far, we have only considered the effect of the real part of χ(3). However, at higher peak powers additional nonlinear absorptive processes may contribute to the imaginary part of the nonlinear susceptibility. To probe the effect of intensity-dependent absorption on SC generation, we measured SC spectra in water with and without nanoparticles (Er = 1.44 eV = 861 nm) at Ppu = 170 MW and comparison between the SC and the differential spectra at two Ppu values is made in Fig. 4. With pure water, the comparison between the spectra at higher and lower spectra Ppu reveals (i) significant increase in the spectral extent on the shorter-wavelength side, with △ν = 328 meV = 160 nm from △ν = 207 meV = 107 nm; (ii) blue-shifted peak energy 1.56 eV (795 nm) from 1.52 eV (816 nm); and (iii) stronger longer-wavelength emission. These observations can be rationalized in terms of stronger nonlinear response at higher peak power. Compared to undoped water, the change in spectral broadening for water doped with nanoparticles is marginal (△ν = 380 meV = 180 nm from △ν = 368 meV = 173 nm), with overall narrowing of the SC spectrum. This is unexpected as SPR-induced localization is expected to give rise to much larger spectral broadening at higher peak powers. It should be noted that χpl(3) is a complex quantity.24,26,27 At higher Ppu, the intensity dependent imaginary component amounts to stronger attenuation, suppressing SC generation (Fig. 4) possibly due to heating of the nanoparticles. Another possibility that might account for the observed suppression might be the dependence of χpl(3) on quantities like the time-dependent electron density which do not scale with pump power.24,38,39,40
Figure
Fig 4.
Comparison of (a) transmitted SC and (b) △S/Sin spectra of pure water (dashed) and doped water with ER = 1.44 eV = 861 nm (solid), recorded at Ppu = 170 MW (top) and Ppu = 60 MW (bottom). The spectra are shifted vertically for clarity; horizontal dashed lines mark the shifted zero positions. Note the significant change in spectral extent in case of water athigher Ppu (△ν = 328 meV = 160 nm from △ν = 207 meV = 107 nm); the increase for nanoparticle-doped water is only marginal (△ν = 380 meV = 180 nm from △ν = 368 meV = 173 nm), with an overall narrower spectrum.
View first occurrence of Fig. 4 in article.
We find Ppu ∼ 60 MW to be optimum for yielding the maximum spectral extent with a relatively flat SC spectrum. The lower peak power is below the threshold of SC generation whereas at higher power the competing imaginary component of χpl(3) restricts broadening. Even though pure water could yield larger spectral extent at sufficiently intense pumping, the overall narrowing of the SC spectrum puts an upper limit on the usable power. Also, at higher powers multiple-filaments are unavoidable; they severely affect the polarization41 and spatial profile of the SC spectrum. Our results demonstrate that by exploiting the resonant nature of SPR-induced field enhancement, spectrally flat and broad SC in water can be obtained at few μJ per pulse energies, even at extremely low doping concentrations. Our experiments were performed with 1.54 eV (805 nm) pumping, where water is transparent. It would be interesting to investigate the effect of SPR on SC generation under excitation where water exhibits anomalous dispersion.
In summary, we have investigated the SC generation in water doped with gold nanoparticles exhibiting SPR. Our results show that spectrally flat SC generation with significant increase in the spectral extent is possible by overlapping the nanoparticle SPR with the incident spectrum at 1.54 eV (805 nm). We also show phenomenologically that the plasma contribution to χ(3) plays a central role in governing SC generation in pure as well as doped-water. We anticipate that the prominent alterations of SC spectrum at low pumping threshold may open up innovative directions in various optical imaging applications.

