Secretary of State John Kerry yesterday charged there was evidence of the deadly nerve gas sarin in an August assault in Syria as he built the case for a military strike — even as he and Bay State Democrats defended President Obama’s sudden decision to seek congressional approval before attacking.

“This case (for an attack) is going to build stronger and stronger,” Kerry said. “The people of America should be celebrating that the president is not acting unilaterally.”

Members of the Massachusetts congressional delegation were among 100 lawmakers briefed yesterday on the potential Middle East assault. U.S. Sen. Edward J. Markey told the Herald they were assured by Pentagon officials that waiting for a congressional debate would not hamper any military strike.

“It’s very important that not only Congress, but the American public have a full understanding of the range of arguments,” Markey said as he left the briefing. “The military kept saying they can act in a week or they can act in a month. Today was just the beginning of the process. There will be more hearings this week to fully flesh out the argument.”

On Friday, Kerry laid out his case for a U.S. assault on Syria, saying President Bashar Assad was behind the “brutal and flagrant” Aug. 21 chemical weapons attack that killed nearly 1,500 civilians, including at least 426 children.

The next day, Obama unexpectedly announced he would seek congressional approval before taking military action.

He can expect an uphill battle, Republicans indicated yesterday.

If a vote were held today, “it would probably be a no vote,” said U.S. Rep Peter King, a New Yorker who is a member of the majority Republican Party in the House. “I’m hoping by the time next week comes around and, hopefully, the president can make his case that he will be he able to get a majority of the House of Representatives. Right now, it would be difficult.”

However, Kerry said he believes the resolution will pass, as he charged that the nerve gas sarin had been used to kill more than 1,400 people — the first mass chemical weapons attack in more than two decades.

“I can’t contemplate that the Congress would turn its back on all of that responsibility and the fact that we would have, in fact, granted impunity to a ruthless dictator to continue to gas his people,” Kerry said. “Those are the stakes.”

Later this week, Obama is slated to travel to St. Petersburg for the G-20 summit.

He should use the time to garner much-needed international support as well, Markey and U.S. Rep Stephen F. Lynch said.

“He said today he is going to use the opportunity,” Lynch said.

The White House has sent Congress a draft of a resolution seeking approval for a military response to “deter, disrupt, prevent and degrade” the Assad regime’s ability to use chemical weapons. The Senate will hold hearings next week so a vote can take place after Congress returns from summer break Sept. 9.

